 CHAPTER In . VARIOUS RMS Of FLYING MACHINES . 
 There are three distinct and radically different forms of flying machines . 
       These are : 
 Aeroplane , helicopters and ornithopter . 
 Of these the aeroplane takes precedence and is used almost exclusively by 
       successful aviators , the helicopters and ornithopter having been tried and 
       found lacking in some vital features , while at the same time in some 
       respects the helicopter has advantages not found in the aeroplane . 
 What the Helicopter Is . 
 The helicopter gets helicopter name from being fitted with vertical propellers or 
       helices ( see illustration ) by the action of which the machine is raised 
       directly from the ground into the air . This does away with the necessity 
       for getting the machine under a gliding headway before This floats , as is 
       the case with the aeroplane , and consequently the helicopter can be 
       handled in a much smaller space than is required for an aeroplane . This , 
       in many instances , is an important advantage , but advantage is the only one the 
       helicopter possesses , and is more than overcome by advantage drawbacks . The most 
       serious of these is that the helicopter is deficient in sustaining 
       capacity , and requires too much motive power . 
 Form of the Ornithopter . 
 The ornithopter has hinged planes which work like the wings of a bird . At 
       first thought this would seem to be the correct principle , and most of the 
       early experiments conducted planes operations on this line . It is now 
       generally understood , however , that the bird in soaring is in reality an 
       aeroplane , bird extended wings serving to sustain , as well as propel , the 
       body . At any rate the ornithopter has not been successful in aviation , and 
       has been interesting mainly as an ingenious toy . Attempts to construct ornithopter 
       on a scale that would permit of ornithopter use by man in actual aerial flights 
       have been far from encouraging . 
 Three Kinds of Aeroplane . 
 There are three forms of aeroplane , with all of which more or less 
       success has been attained . These are : 
 The monoplane , a one - surfaced plane , like that used by Blert . 
 The biplane , a two - surfaced plane , now used by the Rights , Curtiss , 
       Format , and others . 
 The triple , a three - surfaced plane This form is but little used , form 
       only prominent advocate at present being Elle Latimes , a Danish 
       experimented , who has not thus far accomplished much . 
 Whatever of real success has been accomplished in aviation may be credited 
       to the monoplane and biplane , with the balance in favor of the latter . The 
       monoplane is the more simple in construction and , where weight - sustaining 
       capacity is not a prime requisite , may probably be found the most 
       convenient . This opinion is based on the fact that the smaller the surface 
       of the plane the less will be the resistance offered to the air , and the 
       greater will be the speed at which the machine may be moved . On the other 
       hand , the biplane has a much greater plane surface ( double that of a 
       monoplane of the same size ) and consequently much greater weight - carrying 
       capacity . 
 Differences in Planes . 
 While all biplane are of the same general construction so far as the main 
       planes are concerned , each aviator has aviator own ideas as to the " rigging . " 
 Wright , for instance , places a double horizontal rudder in front , with a 
       vertical rudder in the rear . There are no partitions between the main 
       planes , and the bicycle wheels used on other forms are replaced by kids . 
 Visit , on the contrary , divides the main planes with vertical partitions 
       to increase stability in turning ; uses a single - plane horizontal rudder in 
       front , and a big box - tail with vertical rudder at the rear ; also the 
       bicycle wheels . 
 Curtiss attaches horizontal stabilizing surfaces to the upper plane ; has a 
       double horizontal rudder in front , with a vertical rudder and horizontal 
       stabilizing surfaces in rear . Also the bicycle wheel lighting gear .