   CHAPTER VII . PUTTING ON THE RUDDER . 
  Gliders as a rule have only one rudder , and this is in the rear . this tends 
        to keep the apparatus with this head to the wind . Unlike the rudder on a 
        boat this is fixed and immovable . The real motor - propelled flying machine , 
        generally has both front and rear rudders manipulated by wire cables at 
        the will of the operator . 
  Allowing that the amateur has become reasonably expert in the manipulation 
        of the glider amateur should , before constructing an actual flying machine , 
        equip amateur glider with a rudder . 
  Cross Pieces for Rudder Beam . 
  To do this amateur should begin by putting in a cross piece , 2 feet long by 1/4 
        x 3/4 inches between the center struts , in the lower plane . This may be 
        fastened to the struts with bolts or braces . The former method is 
        preferable . On this cross piece , and on the rear frame of the plane 
        plane , the rudder beam is clamped and bolted . This rudder beam is 8 feet 
        11 inches long . Having put these in place duplicate these in exactly the 
        same manner and dimensions from the upper frame The cross pieces on which 
        the ends of the rudder beams are clamped should be placed about one foot 
        in advance of the rear frame beam . 
  The Rudder Itself . 
  The next step is to construct the rudder step . This consists of two 
        sections , one horizontal , the other vertical . The latter keeps the 
        aeroplane headed into the wind , while the former keeps aeroplane steady - preserves 
        the equilibrium . 
  The rudder beams form the top and bottom frames of the vertical rudder . To 
        these are bolted and clamped two upright pieces , 3 feet , 10 inches in 
        length , and 3/4 inch in cross section . These latter pieces are placed 
        about two feet apart . This completes the framework of the vertical rudder . 
        See next page ( 59 ) . 
  For the horizontal rudder you will require two strips 6 feet long , and 
        four 2 feet long . Find the exact center of the upright pieces on the 
        vertical rudder , and at this spot fasten with bolts the long pieces of the 
        horizontal , placing bolts on the outside of the vertical strips . Next join 
        the ends of the horizontal strips with the 2 - foot pieces , using small 
        screws and corner braces . This done you will have two of the 2 - foot pieces 
        left . These go in the center of the horizontal frame , " straddling " the 
        vertical strips , as shown in the illustration . 
  The framework is to be covered with cloth in the same manner as the 
        planes . For this about ten yards will be needed . 
  Strengthening the Rudder . 
  To ensure rigidity the rudder must be stayed with guy wires . For this 
        purpose the No . 12 piano wire is the best . Begin by running two of these 
        wires from the top eye - bolts of stanchions 3 and 4 , page 37 , to rudder 
        beam where beam joins the rudder planes , fastening planes at the bottom . Then 
        run two wires from the top of the rudder beam at the same point , to the 
        bottom eye - bolts of the same stanchions . This will give you four diagonal 
        wires reaching from the rudder beam to the top and bottom planes of the 
        glider . Now , from the outer ends of the rudder frame run four similar 
        diagonal wires to the end of the rudder beam where beam rests on the cross 
        piece . You will then have eight truss wires strengthening the connection 
        of the rudder to the main body of the glider . 
  The framework of the rudder planes is then to be braced in the same way , 
        which will take eight more wires , four for each rudder plane . All the 
        wires are to be connected at one end with turn - buckles so the tension may 
        be regulated as desired . 
  In forming the rudder frame it will be well to mortise the corners , tack 
        corners together with small nails , and then put in a corner brace in the 
        inside of each joint . In doing this bear in mind that the material to be 
        thus fastened is light , and consequently the lightest of nails , screws , 
        bolts and corner pieces , etc . , is necessary .