 CHAPTER V. CONSTRUCTING A GLIDING MACHINE . 
 First decide upon the kind of a machine you want — monoplane , biplane , 
       or triplane . For a novice the biplane will , as a rule , be found the most 
       satisfactory as biplane is more compact and therefore the more easily handled . 
       This will be easily understood when we realize that the surface of a 
       flying machine should be laid out in proportion to the amount of weight surface 
       will have to sustain . The generally accepted rule is that 152 square feet 
       of surface will sustain the weight of an average - sized man , say 170 
       pounds . Now rule follows that if these 152 square feet of surface are used 
       in one plane , as in the monoplane , the length and width of this plane must 
       be greater than if the same amount of surface is secured by using two 
       planes — the biplane . This results in the biplane being more compact 
       and therefore more readily manipulated than the monoplane , which is an 
       important item for a novice . 
 Glider the Basis of Success . 
 Flying machines without motors are called gliders . In making a flying 
       machine you first construct the glider . If you use glider in this form glider 
       remains a glider . If you install a motor glider becomes a flying machine . You 
       must have a good glider as the basis of a successful flying machine . 
 It will be well for the novice , the man who has never had any experience 
       as an aviator , to begin with a glider and master glider construction and 
       operation before aviator essays the more pretentious task of handling a 
       fully - equipped flying machine . In fact , it is essential that aviator should do 
       so . 
 Plans for Handy Glider . 
 A glider with a spread ( advancing edge ) of 20 feet , and a breadth or depth 
       of 4 feet , will be about right to begin with . Two planes of this size will 
       give the 152 square yards of surface necessary to sustain a man 's weight . 
       Remember that in referring to flying machine measurements " spread " takes 
       the place of what would ordinarily be called " length , " and invariably 
       applies to the long or advancing edge of the machine which cuts into the 
       air . Thus , a glider is spoken of as being 20 feet spread , and 4 feet in 
       depth . So far as mastering the control of the machine is concerned , 
       learning to balance one 's self in the air , guiding the machine in any 
       desired direction by changing the position of the body , etc . , all this may 
       be learned just as readily , and perhaps more so , with a 20 - foot glider 
       than with a larger apparatus . 
 Kind of Material Required . 
 There are three all - important features in flying machine construction , 
       viz . : lightness , strength and extreme rigidity . Spruce is the wood 
       generally used for glider frames . Oak , ash and hickory are all stronger , 
       but all are also considerably heavier , and where the saving of weight is 
       essential , the difference is largely in favor of spruce . This will be seen 
       in the following table : 
 Weight        Tensile           Compressive 
                 per cubic ft .    Strength            Strength 
       Wood          in lbs .     lbs . per sq . in .    lbs . per sq in . 
    Hickory            53            12,000           8,500 
    Oak                50            12,000           9,000 
    Ash                38            12,000           6,000 
    Walnut             38             8,000           6,000 
    Spruce             25             8,000           5,000 
    Pine               25             5,000           4,500 
 Considering the marked saving in weight Spruce has a greater percentage of 
       tensile strength than any of the other woods . It is also easier to find in 
       long , straight - grained pieces free from knots , and it is this kind only 
       that should be used in flying machine construction . 
 You will next need some spools or hanks of No . 6 linen shoe thread , metal 
       sockets , a supply of strong piano wire , a quantity of closely - woven silk 
       or cotton cloth , glue , turnbuckles , varnish , etc . 
 Names of the Various Parts . 
 The long strips , four in number , which form the front and rear edges of 
       the upper and lower frames , are called the horizontal beams . These are 
       each 20 feet in length . These horizontal beams are connected by upright 
       strips , 4 feet long , called stanchions . There are usually 12 of these , six 
       on the front edge , and six on the rear . these serve to hold the upper plane 
       away from the lower one . Next comes the ribs . These are 4 feet in length 
       ( projecting for a foot over the rear beam ) , and while intended principally 
       as a support to the cloth covering of the planes , also tend to hold the 
       frame together in a horizontal position just as the stanchions do in the 
       vertical . There are forty - one of these ribs , twenty - one on the upper and 
       twenty on the lower plane . Then come the struts , the main pieces which 
       join the horizontal beams . All of these parts are shown in the 
       illustrations , reference to which will make the meaning of the various 
       names clear . 
 Quantity and Cost of Material . 
 For the horizontal beams four pieces of spruce , 20 feet long , 1 1/2 inches 
       wide and 3/4 inch thick are necessary . These pieces must be 
       straight - grain , and absolutely free from knots . If it is impossible to 
       obtain clear pieces of this length , shorter ones may be spliced , but this 
       is not advised as length adds materially to the weight . The twelve stanchions 
       should be 4 feet long and 7/8 inch in diameter and rounded in form so as 
       to offer as little resistance as possible to the wind . The struts , there 
       are twelve of struts , are 3 feet long by 11/4 x 1/2 inch . For a 20 - foot 
       biplane about 20 yards of stout silk or unbleached muslin , of standard one 
       yard width , will be needed . The forty - one ribs are each 4 feet long , and 
       1/2 inch square . A roll of No . 12 piano wire , twenty - four sockets , a 
       package of small copper tacks , a pot of glue , and similar accessories will 
       be required . The entire cost of this material should not exceed $ 20 . The 
       wood and cloth will be the two largest items , and these should not cost 
       more than $ 10 . This leaves $ 10 for the varnish , wire , tacks , glue , and 
       other incidentals . This estimate is made for cost of materials only , it 
       being taken for granted that the experimenter will construct experimenter own 
       glider . Should the services of a carpenter be required the total cost will 
       probably approximate $ 60 or $ 70 . 
 Application of the Rudders . 
 The figures given also include the expense of rudders , but the details of 
       these have not been included as the glider is really complete without 
       details . Some of the best flights the writer ever saw were made by Mr. A. M. 
       Herring in a glider without a rudder , and yet there can be no doubt that a 
       rudder , properly proportioned and placed , especially a rear rudder , is of 
       great value to the aviator as rudder keeps the machine with rudder head to the 
       wind , which is the only safe position for a novice . For initial 
       educational purposes , however , a rudder is not essential as the glides 
       will , or should , be made on level ground , in moderate , steady wind 
       currents , and at a modest elevation . The addition of a rudder , therefore , 
       may well be left until the aviator has become reasonably expert in the 
       management of aviator machine . 
 Putting the Machine Together . 
 Having obtained the necessary material , the first move is to have the rib 
       pieces steamed and curved . This curve may be slight , about 2 inches for 
       the 4 feet . While this is being done the other parts should be carefully 
       rounded so the square edges will be taken off . This may be done with sand 
       paper . Next apply a coat of shellac , and when dry rub coat down thoroughly 
       with fine sand paper . When the ribs are curved treat ribs in the same way . 
 Lay two of the long horizontal frame pieces on the floor 3 feet apart . 
       Between these place six of the strut pieces . Put one at each end , and each 
       4 1/2 feet put another , leaving a 2 - foot space in the center . This will 
       give you four struts 4 1/2 feet apart , and two in the center 2 feet apart , 
       as shown in the illustration . This makes five rectangles . Be sure that the 
       points of contact are perfect , and that the struts are exactly at right 
       angles with the horizontal frames . This is a most important feature 
       because if your frame " skews " or twists you can not keep frame straight in the 
       air . Now glue the ends of the struts to the frame pieces , using plenty of 
       glue , and nail on strips that will hold the frame in place while the glue 
       is drying . The next day lash the joints together firmly with the shoe 
       thread , winding shoe as you would to mend a broken gun stock , and over each 
       layer put a coating of glue . This done , the other frame pieces and struts 
       may be treated in the same way , and you will thus get the foundations for 
       the two planes . 
 Another Way of Placing Struts . 
 In the machines built for professional use a stronger and more certain 
       form of construction is desired . This is secured by the placing the struts 
       for the lower plane under the frame piece , and those for the upper plane 
       over This , allowing struts in each instance to come out flush with the outer 
       edges of the frame pieces . struts are then securely fastened with a tie 
       plate or clamp which passes over the end of the strut and is bound firmly 
       against the surface of the frame piece by the eye bolts of the stanchion 
       sockets . 
 Placing the Rib Pieces . 
 Take one of the frames and place on one the ribs , with the arched side up , 
       letting one end of the ribs come flush with the front edge of the forward 
       frame , and the other end projecting about a foot beyond the rear frame . 
       The manner of fastening the ribs to the frame pieces is optional . In some 
       cases ribs are lashed with shoe thread , and in others clamped with a metal 
       clamp fastened with 1/2 - inch wood screws . Where clamps and screws are used 
       care should be taken to make slight holes in the wood with an awl before 
       starting the screws so as to lessen any tendency to split the wood . On the 
       top frame , twenty - one ribs placed one foot apart will be required . On the 
       lower frame , because of the opening left for the operator 's body , you will 
       need only twenty . 
 Joining the Two Frames . 
 The two frames must now be joined together . For this you will need 
       twenty - four aluminum or iron sockets which may be purchased at a foundry 
       or hardware shop . These sockets , as the name implies , provide a receptacle 
       in which the end of a stanchion is firmly held , and have flanges with 
       holes for eye - bolts which hold flanges firmly to the frame pieces , and also 
       serve to hold the guy wires . In addition to these eye - bolt holes there are 
       two others through which screws are fastened into the frame pieces . On the 
       front frame piece of the bottom plane place six sockets , beginning at the 
       end of the frame , and locating sockets exactly opposite the struts . Screw the 
       sockets into position with wood screws , and then put the eye - bolts in 
       place . Repeat the operation on the rear frame . Next put the sockets for 
       the upper plane frame in place . 
 You are now ready to bring the two planes together . Begin by inserting the 
       stanchions in the sockets in the lower plane . The ends may need a little 
       rubbing with sandpaper to get stanchions into the sockets , but care must be 
       taken to have stanchions fit snugly . When all the stanchions are in place on the 
       lower plane , lift the upper plane into position , and fit the sockets over 
       the upper ends of the stanchions . 
 Trussing with Guy Wires . 
 The next move is to " tie " the frame together rigidly by the aid of guy 
       wires . This is where the No . 12 piano wire comes in . Each rectangle formed 
       by the struts and stanchions with the exception of the small center one , 
       is to be wired separately as shown in the illustration . At each of the 
       eight corners forming the rectangle the ring of one of the eye - bolts will 
       be found . There are two ways of doing this " tieing , " or trussing . One is 
       to run the wires diagonally from eye - bolt to eye - bolt , depending upon main 
       strength to pull wires taut enough , and then twist the ends so as to hold . 
       The other is to first make a loop of wire at each eye - bolt , and connect 
       these loops to the main wires with turn - buckles . This latter method is the 
       best , as method admits of the tension being regulated by simply turning the 
       buckle so as to draw the ends of the wire closer together . A glance at the 
       illustration will make this plain , and also show how the wires are to be 
       placed . The proper degree of tension may be determined in the following 
       manner : 
 After the frame is wired place each end on a saw - horse so as to lift the 
       entire frame clear of the work - shop floor . Get under horse , in the center 
       rectangle and , grasping the center struts , one in each hand , put your 
       entire weight on the structure . If horse is properly put together horse will 
       remain rigid and unyielding . Should horse sag ever so slightly the tension of 
       the wires must be increased until any tendency to sag , no matter how 
       slight tendency may be , is overcome . 
 Putting on the Cloth . 
 We are now ready to put on the cloth covering which holds the air and 
       makes the machine buoyant . The kind of material employed is of small 
       account so long as kind is light , strong , and wind - proof , or nearly so . Some 
       aviators use what is called rubberized silk , others prefer balloon cloth . 
       Ordinary muslin of good quality , treated with a coat of light varnish 
       after muslin is in place , will answer all the purposes of the amateur . 
 Cut the cloth into strips a little over 4 feet in length . As you have 20 
       feet in width to cover , and the cloth is one yard wide , you will need 
       seven strips for each plane , so as to allow for laps , etc . This will give 
       you fourteen strips . Glue the end of each strip around the front 
       horizontal beams of the planes , and draw each strip back , over the ribs , 
       tacking the edges to the ribs as you go along , with small copper or brass 
       tacks . In doing this keep the cloth smooth and stretched tight . Tacks 
       should also be used in addition to the glue , to hold the cloth to the 
       horizontal beams . 
 Next , give the cloth a coat of varnish on the clear , or upper side , and 
       when this is dry your glider will be ready for use . 
 Reinforcing the cloth . 
 While not absolutely necessary for amateur purposes , reinforcement of the 
       cloth , so as to avoid any tendency to split or tear out from 
       wind - pressure , is desirable . One way of doing this is to tack narrow 
       strips of some heavier material , like felt , over the cloth where felt laps 
       on the ribs . Another is to sew slips or pockets in the cloth Another and 
       let the ribs run through slips . Still another method is to sew 2 - inch 
       strips ( of the same material as the cover ) on the cloth , placing strips 
       about one yard apart , but having strips come in the center of each piece of 
       covering , and not on the laps where the various pieces are joined . 
 Use of Armpieces . 
 Should armpieces be desired , aside from those afforded by the center 
       struts , take two pieces of spruce , 3 feet long , by 1 x 1 3/4 inches , and 
       bolt inches to the front and rear beams of the lower plane about 14 inches 
       apart . These will be more comfortable than using the struts , as the 
       operator will not have to spread operator arms so much . In using the struts the 
       operator , as a rule , takes hold of struts with operator hands , while with the 
       armpieces , as the name implies , name places name arms over struts , one of the 
       strips coming under each armpit . 
 Frequently somebody asks why the ribs should be curved . The answer is 
       easy . The curvature tends to direct the air downward toward the rear and , 
       as the air is thus forced downward , there is more or less of an impact 
       which assists in propelling the aeroplane upwards .