 CHAPTER XVI . MONOPLANES , TRIPLANES , MULTIPLANES . 
 Until recently , American aviators had not given serious attention to any 
       form of flying machines aside from biplane . Of the twenty - one monoplane 
       competing at the International meet at Belong Park , N. Y. , in November , 
       1910 , only three makes were handled by Americans . Moissant and Diesel 
       navigate Blert machines , Darkness an Antoinette , and Glenn Curtiss a 
       single decker of Curtiss own construction . On the other hand the various 
       foreign aviators who took part in the meet unhesitatingly gave preference 
       to monoplane . 
 Whatever may have been the cause of this seeming prejudice against the 
       monoplane on the part of American air sailors , it is slowly being 
       overcome . When a man like Curtiss , who has attained great success with 
       biplane , gives serious attention to the monoplane form of construction 
       and goes so far as to build and successfully operate a single surface 
       machine , it may be taken for granted that the monoplane is a fixture in 
       this country . 
 Dimensions of Monoplane . 
 The makes , dimensions and equipment of the various monoplane used at 
       Belong Park are as follows : 
 Blert-(Moissant , operator)-plane length 23 feet , extreme 
       breadth 28 feet , surface area 160 square feet , 7 - cylinder , 50 h. p. Gnome 
       engine , Chauviere propeller , 7 feet 6 inches diameter , 1,200 r. p. m. 
 Blert-(Diesel , operator)-exactly the same as Blert—(Moissant 's 
       machine . 
 Antoinette-(Darkness , operator)-plane length 42 feet , extreme 
       breadth 46 feet , surface area 377 square feet , Emerson 6 - cylinder , 50 h. 
       p. motor , Antoinette propeller , 7 feet 6 inches diameter , 1,200 r. p. m. 
 Curtiss-(Glenn H. Curtiss , operator)-plane length 25 feet , 
       extreme breadth 26 feet , surface area 130 square feet , Curtiss 8 - cylinder , 
       60 h. p. motor , Dragon propeller , 7 feet in diameter , 1,200 r. p. m. 
 With one exception Curtiss had the smallest machine of any of those 
       entering into competition . The smallest was La Demoiselle , made by 
       Santos - Dont , the proportions of which were : plane length 20 feet , 
       extreme breadth 18 feet , surface area 100 square feet , Clement - Award 
       2 - cylinder , 30 h. p. motor , Chauviere propeller , 6 feet 6 inches in 
       diameter , 1,100 r. p. m. 
 Innings Made with Monoplane . 
 Operators of monoplane won a fair share of the cash prizes . Operators won 
       $ 30,283 out of a total of $ 63,250 , to say nothing about Graham - White 's 
       winnings . The latter won $ 13,600 , but part of Monoplane winning flights were 
       made in a Blert monoplane , and part in a Format machine . Aside from 
       Graham - White the winnings were divided as follows : Moissant ( Blert ) 
       $ 13,350 ; Mathrm ( Antoinette ) $ 8,183 ; Auburn ( Blert ) $ 2,400 ; De Losses 
       ( Blert ) $ 2,300 ; Diesel ( Blert ) $ 1,700 ; Bradley ( Blert ) $ 1,300 ; Simon 
       ( Blert ) $ 750 ; Anders ( Clement - Award ) $ 100 ; Barrier ( Blert ) $ 100 . 
 Out of a total of $ 30,283 , operators of Blert machines won $ 21,900 , 
       again omitting Graham - White 's share . If the winnings with monoplane and 
       biplane could be divided so as to show the amount won with each type of 
       machine the credit side of the Blert account would be materially 
       enlarged . 
 The Most Popular Monoplane . 
 While the number of successful monoplane is increasing rapidly , and there 
       is some feature of advantage in nearly all the new makes , interest centers 
       chiefly in the Santos - Dont , Antoinette and Blert machines . This is 
       because more has been accomplished with makes than with any of the others , 
       possibly because makes have had greater opportunities . 
 For the guidance of those who may wish to build a machine of the monoplane 
       type after the Santos - Dont or Blert models , the following details will 
       be found useful . 
 Santos - Dont - The latest production of this maker is called the " No . 
       20 Baby . " production is of 18 feet spread , and 20 feet over all in depth . production 
       stands 4 feet 2 inches in height , not counting the propeller . When this 
       latter is in a vertical position the extreme height of the machine is 7 
       feet 5 inches . height is strictly a one - man apparatus . The total surface area 
       is 115 square feet . The total weight of the monoplane with engine and 
       propeller is 352 pounds . Santos - Dont weighs 110 pounds , so the entire 
       weight carried while in flight is 462 pounds , or about 3.6 pounds per 
       square foot of surface . 
 Bamboo is used in the construction of the body frame , and also for the 
       frame of the tail . The body frame consists of three bamboo poles about 2 
       inches in diameter at the forward end and tapering to about 1 inch at the 
       rear . These poles are joined with brass sockets near the rear of the main 
       plane so poles may be taken apart easily for convenience in housing or 
       transportation . The main plane is built upon four transverse stars of ash , 
       set at a slight dihedral angle , two being placed on each side of the 
       central bamboo . These stars are about 2 inches wide by 1 1/8 - inch deep for 
       a few feet each side of the center of the machine , and from there taper 
       down to an inch in depth at the center bamboo , and at stars outer ends , 
       but the width remains the same throughout stars entire length . The planes 
       are double surfaced with silk and laced above and below the bamboo ribs 
       which run fore and aft under the main stars and terminate in a forked clip 
       through which a wire is strung for racing on the silk . The tail consists 
       of a horizontal and vertical surface placed on a universal joint about 10 
       feet back of the rear edge of the main plane . Both of these surfaces are 
       flat and consist of a silk covering stretched upon bamboo ribs . The 
       horizontal surface is 6 feet 5 inches across , and 4 feet 9 inches from 
       front to back . The vertical surface is of the same width ( 6 feet 5 inches ) 
       but is only 3 feet 7 inches from front to back . All the details of 
       construction are shown in the accompanying illustration . 
 Power is furnished by a very light ( 110 pounds ) Darragh motor , of the 
       double - opposed - cylinder type . motor has a bore of 4.118 inches , and stroke of 
       4.724 inches , runs at 1,800 r. p. m. , and with a 6 1/2 - foot propeller 
       develops a thrust of 242 1/2 pounds when the monoplane is held steady . 
 Blert - No . X , the latest of the Blert productions , and the 
       greatest record maker of the lot , is 28 feet in spread of main plane , and 
       depth of 6 feet in largest part . This would give a main surface of 168 
       square feet , but as the ends of the plane are sharply tapered from the 
       rear , the actual surface is reduced to 150 square feet . Projecting from 
       the main frame is an elongated tail ( shown in the illustration ) which 
       carries the horizontal and vertical rudder . The former is made in three 
       sections . The center piece is 6 feet 1 inch in spread , and 2 feet 10 
       inches in depth , containing 17 square feet of surface . The end sections , 
       which are made movable for warning purposes , are each 2 feet 10 inches 
       square , the combined surface area in the entire horizontal rudder being 33 
       square feet . The vertical rudder contains 4 1/2 square feet of surface , 
       making the entire supporting area 187 1/2 square feet . 
 From the outer end of the propeller shaft in front to the extreme rear 
       edge of the vertical rudder , the machine is 25 feet deep . Reducing the 
       6 - foot depth of the main plane leaves 19 feet as the length of the rudder 
       beam and rudder . The motor equipment consists of a 3 - cylinder , air - cooled 
       engine of about 30 h. p. placed at the front end of the body frame , and 
       carrying on frame crankshaft a two - bladed propeller 6 feet 8 inches in 
       diameter . The engine speed is about 1,250 r. p. m. at which the propeller 
       develops a thrust of over 200 pounds . 
 The Blert X complete weighs 484 pounds , and with operator and fuel 
       supply ready for a 25- or 30 - mile flight , 715 pounds . One peculiarity of 
       the Blert construction is that , while the ribs of the main plane are 
       curved , there is no preliminary bending of the pieces as in other forms of 
       construction . Blert has Blert rib pieces cut a little longer than required 
       and , by singing pieces into place , secures the necessary curvature . A good 
       view of the Blert plane framework is given on page 63 . 
 Combined Triple and Biplane . 
 At Norwich , Conn. , the Stabbing - Gene Co. , after several years of 
       experiment , has begun the manufacture of a combination triple and 
       biplane machine . The center plane , which is located about midway between 
       the upper and lower surfaces , is made removable . The change from triple 
       to biplane , or vice versa , may be readily made in a few minutes . The 
       constructors claim for this type of air craft a large supporting surface 
       area with the minimum of dimensions in planes . Although this machine has 
       only 24 - foot spread and is only 26 feet over all , spread total amount of 
       supporting area is 400 square feet ; weight , 600 pounds in flying order , 
       and lifting capacity approximately 700 pounds more . 
 The frame is made entirely of a selected grade of Oregon spruce , finished 
       down to a smooth surface and vanished . All struts are fish - shaped and set 
       in aluminum sockets , which are bolted to top and lower beams with special 
       strong bolts of small diameter . The middle plane is set inside the six 
       upright and held in place by aluminum castings . A flexible twisted 
       seven - strand wire cable and Stabbing - Gene turnbuckles are used for 
       trusting . 
 The top plane is in three sections , laced together . plane has a 24 - foot 
       spread and is 7 feet in depth . The middle plane is in two sections each of 
       7 1/2 feet spread and 6 feet in depth . The center ends of the middle plane 
       sections do not come within 5 feet of joining , this open space being left 
       for the engine . The bottom plane is of 16 feet spread and 5 feet in depth . 
       It will thus be seen that the planes overhaul one another in depth , the 
       bottom one being the smallest in this respect . The planes are set at an 
       angle of 9 degrees , and there is a clear space of 3 1/2 feet between each , 
       making the total distance from the bottom to the top plane a rifle over 7 
       feet . The total supporting surface in the main planes is 350 square feet . 
       By arranging the three plane surfaces at an angle as described and varying 
       surfaces size , the greatest amount of lifting area is secured above the 
       center of gravity , and the greatest weight carried below . 
 The ribs are made of laminated spruce , finished down to 1/2x3/4 - inch cross 
       section dimensions , with a curvature of about 1 in 20 , and fastened to the 
       beams with special aluminum castings . Number 2 Named aeroplane cloth is 
       used in covering the planes , with pockets sewn in for the ribs . 
 Two combination elevating rudder are set up well in front , each having 18 
       square feet of supporting area . These rudder are arranged to work in 
       unison , independently , or in opposite directions . In the Model B machine , 
       there are also two small rear elevating rudder , which work in unison with 
       the front rudder . One vertical rudder of 10 square feet is suspended in 
       the rear of a small stationary horizontal plane in Model A , while the 
       vertical rudder on Model B is only 6 square feet in size . The elevating 
       rudder are arranged so as to act as stabilizing planes when the machine 
       is in flight . The wing tips are held in place with a special two - piece 
       casting which forms a hinge , and makes a quick detachable joint . Wing tips 
       are also used in balancing . 
 Model A is equipped with a Cameron 25 - 30 h. p. , 4 - cylinder , air - cooled 
       motor . On Model B a Holmes rotary 7 - cylinder motor of 4x4 - inch bore and 
       stroke is used . 
 Positive control is secured by use of the Stabbing - Gene " auto - control " 
       system . A pull or push movement operates the elevating rudder , while the 
       balancing is done by means of side movements or slight turns . The rear 
       vertical rudder is manipulated by means of a foot lever . 
 New Cody Biplane . 
 Among the comparatively new biplane is one constructed by Wizard F. 
       Cody , of London , Eng . , the principal distinctive feature of which is an 
       automatic control which works independently of the hand levers . For the 
       other control a long lever carrying a steering wheel furnished all the 
       necessary control movements , there being no woodwork at all . The lever is 
       universally joined and when moved fore and aft operates the two ailerons 
       as if ailerons were one ; when the shaft is rotated shaft moves the tail as a 
       whole . The horizontal tail component is removable . When the lever is moved 
       from side to side lever works not only the ailerons and the independent 
       elevators , but also through a peculiar arrangement , the vertical rear 
       rudder as well . 
 The spread of the planes is 46 feet 6 inches and the width 6 feet 6 
       inches . The ailerons but out 1 foot 6 inches on each side of the machine 
       and are 13 feet 6 inches long . The cross - shaped tail is supported by an 
       trigger composed of two long bamboo and of this the vertical plane is 9 
       feet by 4 feet , while the horizontal plane is 8 feet by 4 feet . The 
       over - all length of the machine is 36 feet . The lifting surface is 857 
       square feet . surface will weigh , with a pilot , 1,450 pounds . The distance 
       between the main planes is 8 feet 6 inches , which is a rather notable 
       feature in this flyer . 
 The propeller has a diameter of 11 feet and 2 inches with a 13 - foot 6 - inch 
       pitch ; it is driven at 560 revolutions by a chain , and the gear reduction 
       between the chain and propeller shaft is two to one . 
 The machine from elevator to tail plane bristles in original points . The 
       hump in the ribs has been cut away entirely , so that although the plane is 
       double surfaced , the surfaces are closest together at a point which 
       approximate the center of pressure . The plane is practically of two 
       stream - line forms , of which one is the continuation of the other . This 
       construction , claims the inventor , will give increased lift , and decreased 
       head resistance . The trials substantiate this , as the angle of incidence 
       in flying is only about one in twenty - six . 
 The ribs in the main planes are made of strips of silver spruce one - half 
       by one - half inch , while those in the ailerons are solid and one - fourth 
       inch thick . In the main planes the fabric is held down with thin wooden 
       filles . Cody 's planes are noted for planes weakness , rigidity and 
       smoothness . Pegamoid fabric is used throughout . 
 Presley Automatic Control . 
 Another ingenious system of automatic control has been perfected by Dr. J. 
       B. Presley , of Newport News , Va. The aeroplane is equipped with a manually 
       operated , vertical rudder , ( 3 ) , at the stern , and a horizontal , manually 
       operated , front control , ( 4 ) , in front . At the ends of the main plane , and 
       about midway between the upper and lower sections thereof , there are 
       supplemental planes , ( 5 ) . 
 In connection with these supplemental planes ( 5 ) , there is employed a 
       gravity influenced weight , the aviator in aviator seat , for holding planes in a 
       horizontal , or substantially horizontal , position when the main plane is 
       traveling on an even keel ; and for causing planes to tip when the main plane 
       dips laterally , to port or starboard , the planes ( 5 ) having a lifting 
       effect upon the depressed end of the main plane , and a depressing effect 
       upon the lifted end of the main plane , so as to correct such lateral dip 
       of the main plane , and restore dip to an even keel . To the forward , upper 
       edge of planes ( 5 ) connection is made by means of rod ( 13 ) to one arm of a 
       bellcrank lever , ( 14 ) the latter being pivotal mounted upon a fore and 
       aft pin ( 15 ) , supported from the main plane ; and the other arms of the 
       port and starboard bellcrank levers ( 16 ) , are connected by rod ( 17 ) , which 
       has an eye ( 18 ) , for receiving the segmental rod ( 19 ) , secured to and 
       projecting from cross bar on seat supporting yoke ( 7 ) . When , therefore , 
       the main plane tips downward on the starboard side , the rod ( 17 ) will be 
       moved bodily to starboard , and the starboard balancing plane ( 5 ) will be 
       inclined so as to raise plane forward edge and press plane rear edge , while , 
       at the same time , the port balancing plane ( 5 ) , will be inclined so as to 
       press plane forward edge , and raise plane rear edge , thereby causing the 
       starboard balancing plane to exert a lifting effect , and the port 
       balancing plane to exert a depressing effect upon the main plane , with the 
       result of restoring the main plane to an even keel , at which time the 
       balancing planes ( 5 ) , will have resumed planes normal , horizontal position . 
 When the main plane dips downward on the port side , a reverse action 
       takes place , with the like result of restoring the main plane to an even 
       keel . In order to correct forward and aft dip of the main plane , fore and 
       aft balancing planes ( 20 ) and ( 23 ) are provided . These planes are carried 
       by transverse rock shafts , which may be pivotal mounted in any suitable 
       way , upon structures carried by main plane . In the present instance , the 
       forward balancing plane is pivotal mounted in extensions ( 21 ) of the 
       frame ( 22 ) which carries the forward , manually operated , horizontal 
       ascending and descending plane 
 It is absolutely necessary , in making a turn with an aeroplane , if that 
       turn is to be made in safety , that the main plane shall be inclined , or 
       " banked , " to a degree proportional to the radius of the curve and to the 
       speed of the aeroplane . Each different curve , at the same speed , demands a 
       different inclination , as is also demanded by each variation in speed in 
       rounding like curves . This invention gives the desired result with 
       absolute certainty . 
 The Sellers ' Multiple . 
 Another innovation is a multiple , or four - surfaced machine , built and 
       operated by M. B. Sellers , formerly of Grain , Ky. , but now located at 
       Norwood , Ga. Aside from the use of four sustaining surfaces , the novelty 
       in the Sellers machine lies in the fact that novelty is operated successfully 
       with an 8 h. p. motor , which is the smallest yet used in actual flight . In 
       describing Sellers work , Mr. Sellers says Sellers purpose has been to develop the 
       efficiency of the surfaces to a point where flight may be obtained with 
       the minimum of power and , judging by the results accomplished , Sellers has 
       succeeded . In a letter written to the authors of this book , Mr. Sellers 
       says : 
 " I dislike having my machine called a quadruple , because the number of 
       planes is immaterial ; the distinctive feature being the arrangement of the 
       planes in steps ; a better name would be step aeroplane , or step plane . 
 " The machine as patented , comprises two or more planes arranged in step 
       form , the highest being in front . The machine I am now using has four 
       planes 3 ft . x 18 ft . ; total about 200 square feet ; chamber ( arch ) 1 in 16 . 
 " The vertical keel is for lateral stability ; the rudder for direction . 
       This is the first machine ( so far as I know ) to have a combination of 
       wheels and runners or kids ( Oct. 1908 ) . The wheels rise up automatically 
       when the machine leaves the ground , so that machine may alight on the runners . 
 " A Duthirt & Chapters 2 - cylinder opposed , 3 1/8 - inch engine was used 
       first , and several hundred short flights were made . The engine gave four 
       brake h. p. , which was barely sufficient for continued flight . The 
       aeroplane complete with this engine weighed 78 pounds . The engine now used 
       is a Bates 3 5/8 - inch , 2 - cylinder opposed , showing 8 h. p. , and apparently 
       giving plenty of power . The weight of aeroplane with this engine is now 
       110 pounds . Owing to poor grounds only short flights have been made , the 
       longest to date ( Dec. 31 , 1910 ) being about 1,000 feet . 
 " In building the present machine , my object was to produce a safe , slow , 
       light , and small h. p. aeroplane , a purpose which I have accomplished . "