. The simplest form
of periodic motion is represented by an object oscillating on the end of a uniform
coil spring. Because many other types of oscillatory motion closely resemble this
system, we will look at it in detail. We assume that the mass of the spring can be
ignored, and that the spring is mounted horizontally, as shown in Fig. 1a, so that
the object of mass m slides without friction on the horizontal surface. Any spring
has a natural length at which it exerts no force on the mass m. The position of the
mass at this point is called the equilibrium position. If the mass is moved either to
the left, which compresses the spring, or to the right, which stretches it, the spring
exerts a force on the mass that acts in the direction of returning the mass to the
equilibrium position; hence it is called a restoring force. We consider the common
situation where we can assume the restoring force F is directly proportional to the
displacement x the spring has been stretched (Fig. 1b) or compressed (Fig. 1c)
from the equilibrium position: F= -kx.
[force exerted by spring] (1)
Note that the equilibrium position has been chosen at and the minus sign
in Eq. 1 indicates that the restoring force is always in the direction opposite to the
displacement x. For example, if we choose the positive direction to the right in
Fig. 1, x is positive when the spring is stretched (Fig. 1b), but the direction of the
restoring force is to the left (negative direction). If the spring is compressed, x is
negative (to the left) but the force F acts toward the right (Fig. 1c).
Equation 1 is often referred to as Hooke's law, and is accurate only if the spring
is not compressed to where the coils are close to touching, or stretched beyond the
elastic region. Hooke's law works not only for springs but for other oscillating solids
as well; it thus has wide applicability, even though it is valid only over a certain range
of F and x values.
The proportionality constant k in Eq. 1 is called the spring constant for that
particular spring, or its spring stiffness constant. To stretch the spring a distance x, one
has to exert an (external) force on the free end of the spring with a magnitude at least
equal to F_ext = +kx.
[external force on spring]
The greater the value of k, the greater the force needed to stretch a spring a given
distance. That is, the stiffer the spring, the greater the spring constant k.
Note that the force F in Eq. 1 is not a constant, but varies with position. There-
fore the acceleration of the mass m is not constant, so we cannot use the equations
for constant acceleration.
Let us examine what happens when our uniform spring is initially compressed a
distance as shown in Fig. 2a, and then released on the frictionless surface.
The spring exerts a force on the mass that pushes it toward the equilibrium position.
But because the mass has inertia, it passes the equilibrium position with considerable
speed. Indeed, as the mass reaches the equilibrium position, the force on it decreases
to zero, but its speed at this point is a maximum, (Fig. 2b). As the mass moves x=A
farther to the right, the force on it acts to slow it down, and it stops for an instant at 
(Fig. 2c). It then begins moving back in the opposite direction, accelerating
until it passes the equilibrium point (Fig. 2d), and then slows down until it reaches
zero speed at the original starting point, (Fig. 2e). It then repeats the motion, moving back and forth symmetrically between x=A and x=-A