CHAPTER II. THEORY, DEVELOPMENT, AND USE.
While every craft that navigates the air is an airship, all airships are
      not flying machines. The balloon, for instance, is an airship, but it is
      not what is known among aviators as a flying machine. This latter term is
      properly used only in referring to heavier-than-air machines which have no
      gas-bag lifting devices, and are made to really fly by the application of
      engine propulsion.
Mechanical Birds.
All successful flying machines—and there are a number of them—are
      based on bird action. The various designers have studied bird flight and
      soaring, mastered its technique as devised by Nature, and the modern
      flying machine is the result. On an exaggerated, enlarged scale the
      machines which are now navigating the air are nothing more nor less than
      mechanical birds.
Origin of the Aeroplane.
Octave Chanute, of Chicago, may well be called "the developer of the
      flying machine." Leaving balloons and various forms of gas-bags out of
      consideration, other experimenters, notably Langley and Lilienthal,
      antedated him in attempting the navigation of the air on aeroplanes, or
      flying machines, but none of them were wholly successful, and it remained
      for Chanute to demonstrate the practicability of what was then called the
      gliding machine. This term was adopted because the apparatus was, as the
      name implies, simply a gliding machine, being without motor propulsion,
      and intended solely to solve the problem of the best form of construction.
      The biplane, used by Chanute in 1896, is still the basis of most
      successful flying machines, the only radical difference being that motors,
      rudders, etc., have been added.
Character of Chanute's Experiments.
It was the privilege of the author of this book to be Mr. Chanute's guest
      at Millers, Indiana, in 1896, when, in collaboration with Messrs. Herring
      and Avery, he was conducting the series of experiments which have since
      made possible the construction of the modern flying machine which such
      successful aviators as the Wright brothers and others are now using. It
      was a wild country, much frequented by eagles, hawks, and similar birds.
      The enthusiastic trio, Chanute, Herring and Avery, would watch for hours
      the evolutions of some big bird in the air, agreeing in the end on the
      verdict, "When we master the principle of that bird's soaring without wing
      action, we will have come close to solving the problem of the flying
      machine."
Aeroplanes of various forms were constructed by Mr. Chanute with the
      assistance of Messrs. Herring and Avery until, at the time of the writer's
      visit, they had settled upon the biplane, or two-surface machine. Mr.
      Herring later equipped this with a rudder, and made other additions, but
      the general idea is still the basis of the Wright, Curtiss, and other
      machines in which, by the aid of gasolene motors, long flights have been
      made.
Developments by the Wrights.
In 1900 the Wright brothers, William and Orville, who were then in the
      bicycle business in Dayton, Ohio, became interested in Chanute's
      experiments and communicated with him. The result was that the Wrights
      took up Chanute's ideas and developed them further, making many additions
      of their own, one of which was the placing of a rudder in front, and the
      location of the operator horizontally on the machine, thus diminishing by
      four-fifths the wind resistance of the man's body. For three years the
      Wrights experimented with the glider before venturing to add a motor,
      which was not done until they had thoroughly mastered the control of their
      movements in the air.
Limits of the Flying Machine.
In the opinion of competent experts it is idle to look for a commercial
      future for the flying machine. There is, and always will be, a limit to
      its carrying capacity which will prohibit its employment for passenger or
      freight purposes in a wholesale or general way. There are some, of course,
      who will argue that because a machine will carry two people another may be
      constructed that will carry a dozen, but those who make this contention do
      not understand the theory of weight sustentation in the air; or that the
      greater the load the greater must be the lifting power (motors and plane
      surface), and that there is a limit to these—as will be explained
      later on—beyond which the aviator cannot go.
Some Practical Uses.
At the same time there are fields in which the flying machine may be used
      to great advantage. These are:
Sports—Flying machine races or flights will always be popular by
      reason of the element of danger. It is a strange, but nevertheless a true
      proposition, that it is this element which adds zest to all sporting
      events.
Scientific—For exploration of otherwise inaccessible regions such as
      deserts, mountain tops, etc.
Reconnoitering—In time of war flying machines may be used to
      advantage to spy out an enemy's encampment, ascertain its defenses, etc.