By Octave Chanute.
5
      There is a wonderful performance daily exhibited in southern climes and
      occasionally seen in northerly latitudes in summer, which has never been
      thoroughly explained. It is the soaring or sailing flight of certain
      varieties of large birds who transport themselves on rigid, unflapping
      wings in any desired direction; who in winds of 6 to 20 miles per hour,
      circle, rise, advance, return and remain aloft for hours without a beat of
      wing, save for getting under way or convenience in various maneuvers. They
      appear to obtain from the wind alone all the necessary energy, even to
      advancing dead against that wind. This feat is so much opposed to our
      general ideas of physics that those who have not seen it sometimes deny
      its actuality, and those who have only occasionally witnessed it
      subsequently doubt the evidence of their own eyes. Others, who have seen
      the exceptional performances, speculate on various explanations, but the
      majority give it up as a sort of "negative gravity."
5
5
Soaring Power of Birds.
The writer of this paper published in the "Aeronautical Annual" for 1896
      and 1897 an article upon the sailing flight of birds, in which he gave a
      list of the authors who had described such flight or had advanced theories
      for its explanation, and he passed these in review. He also described his
      own observations and submitted some computations to account for the
      observed facts. These computations were correct as far as they went, but
      they were scanty. It was, for instance, shown convincingly by analysis
      that a gull weighing 2.188 pounds, with a total supporting surface of
      2.015 square feet, a maximum body cross-section of 0.126 square feet and a
      maximum cross-section of wing edges of 0.098 square feet, patrolling on
      rigid wings (soaring) on the weather side of a steamer and maintaining an
      upward angle or attitude of 5 degrees to 7 degrees above the horizon, in a
      wind blowing 12.78 miles an hour, which was deflected upward 10 degrees to
      20 degrees by the side of the steamer (these all being carefully observed
      facts), was perfectly sustained at its own "relative speed" of 17.88 miles
      per hour and extracted from the upward trend of the wind sufficient energy
      to overcome all the resistances, this energy amounting to 6.44 foot-pounds
      per second.
Great Power of Gulls.
It was shown that the same bird in flapping flight in calm air, with an
      attitude or incidence of 3 degrees to 5 degrees above the horizon and a
      speed of 20.4 miles an hour was well sustained and expended 5.88
      foot-pounds per second, this being at the rate of 204 pounds sustained per
      horsepower. It was stated also that a gull in its observed maneuvers,
      rising up from a pile head on unflapping wings, then plunging forward
      against the wind and subsequently rising higher than his starting point,
      must either time his ascents and descents exactly with the variations in
      wind velocities, or must meet a wind billow rotating on a horizontal axis
      and come to a poise on its crest, thus availing of an ascending trend.
But the observations failed to demonstrate that the variations of the wind
      gusts and the movements of the bird were absolutely synchronous, and it
      was conjectured that the peculiar shape of the soaring wing of certain
      birds, as differentiated from the flapping wing, might, when experimented
      upon, hereafter account for the performance.
Mystery to be Explained.
These computations, however satisfactory they were for the speed of winds
      observed, failed to account for the observed spiral soaring of buzzards in
      very light winds and the writer was compelled to confess: "Now, this
      spiral soaring in steady breezes of 5 to 10 miles per hour which are
      apparently horizontal, and through which the bird maintains an average
      speed of about 20 miles an hour, is the mystery to be explained. It is not
      accounted for, quantitatively, by any of the theories which have been
      advanced, and it is the one performance which has led some observers to
      claim that it was done through 'aspiration.' i, e., that a bird acted upon
      by a current, actually drew forward into that current against its exact
      direction of motion."
Buzzards Soar in Dead Calm.
A still greater mystery was propounded by the few observers who asserted
      that they had seen buzzards soaring in a dead calm, maintaining their
      elevation and their speed. Among these observers was Mr. E. C. Huffaker,
      at one time assistant experimenter for Professor Langley. The writer
      believed and said then that he must in some way have been mistaken, yet,
      to satisfy himself, he paid several visits to Mr. Huffaker, in Eastern
      Tennessee and took along his anemometer. He saw quite a number of buzzards
      sailing at a height of 75 to 100 feet in breezes measuring 5 or 6 miles an
      hour at the surface of the ground, and once he saw one buzzard soaring
      apparently in a dead calm.
The writer was fairly baffled. The bird was not simply gliding, utilizing
      gravity or acquired momentum, he was actually circling horizontally in
      defiance of physics and mathematics. It took two years and a whole series
      of further observations to bring those two sciences into accord with the
      facts.
Results of Close Observations.
Curiously enough the key to the performance of circling in a light wind or
      a dead calm was not found through the usual way of gathering human
      knowledge, i. e., through observations and experiment. These had failed
      because I did not know what to look for. The mystery was, in fact, solved
      by an eclectic process of conjecture and computation, but once these
      computations indicated what observations should be made, the results gave
      at once the reasons for the circling of the birds, for their then observed
      attitude, and for the necessity of an independent initial sustaining speed
      before soaring began. Both Mr. Huffaker and myself verified the data many
      times and I made the computations.
These observations disclosed several facts:
1st.—That winds blowing five to seventeen miles per hour frequently
      had rising trends of 10 degrees to 15 degrees, and that upon occasions
      when there seemed to be absolutely no wind, there was often nevertheless a
      local rising of the air estimated at a rate of four to eight miles or more
      per hour. This was ascertained by watching thistledown, and rising fogs
      alongside of trees or hills of known height. Everyone will readily realize
      that when walking at the rate of four to eight miles an hour in a dead
      calm the "relative wind" is quite inappreciable to the senses and that
      such a rising air would not be noticed.
2nd.—That the buzzard, sailing in an apparently dead horizontal
      calm, progressed at speeds of fifteen to eighteen miles per hour, as
      measured by his shadow on the ground. It was thought that the air was then
      possibly rising 8.8 feet per second, or six miles per hour.
3rd.—That when soaring in very light winds the angle of incidence of
      the buzzards was negative to the horizon—i. e., that when seen
      coming toward the eye, the afternoon light shone on the back instead of on
      the breast, as would have been the case had the angle been inclined above
      the horizon.
4th.—That the sailing performance only occurred after the bird had
      acquired an initial velocity of at least fifteen or eighteen miles per
      hour, either by industrious flapping or by descending from a perch.
An Interesting Experiment.
5th.—That the whole resistance of a stuffed buzzard, at a negative
      angle of 3 degrees in a current of air of 15.52 miles per hour, was 0.27
      pounds. This test was kindly made for the writer by Professor A. F. Zahm
      in the "wind tunnel" of the Catholic University at Washington, D. C., who,
      moreover, stated that the resistance of a live bird might be less, as the
      dried plumage could not be made to lie smooth.
This particular buzzard weighed in life 4.25 pounds, the area of his wings
      and body was 4.57 square feet, the maximum cross-section of his body was
      0.110 square feet, and that of his wing edges when fully extended was
      0.244 square feet.
With these data, it became surprisingly easy to compute the performance
      with the coefficients of Lilienthal for various angles of incidence and to
      demonstrate how this buzzard could soar horizontally in a dead horizontal
      calm, provided that it was not a vertical calm, and that the air was
      rising at the rate of four or six miles per hour, the lowest observed, and
      quite inappreciable without actual measuring.
Some Data on Bird Power.
The most difficult case is purposely selected. For if we assume that the
      bird has previously acquired an initial minimum speed of seventeen miles
      an hour (24.93 feet per second, nearly the lowest measured), and that the
      air was rising vertically six miles an hour (8.80 feet per second), then
      we have as the trend of the "relative wind" encountered:
6
      — = 0.353, or the tangent of 19 degrees 26'.
      17
which brings the case into the category of rising wind effects. But the
      bird was observed to have a negative angle to the horizon of about 3
      degrees, as near as could be guessed, so that his angle of incidence to
      the "relative wind" was reduced to 16 degrees 26'.
The relative speed of his soaring was therefore:
Velocity = square root of (17 squared + 6 squared) = 18.03 miles per hour.
At this speed, using the Langley co-efficient recently practically
      confirmed by the accurate experiments of Mr. Eiffel, the air pressure
      would be:
18.03 squared X 0.00327 = 1.063 pounds per square foot.
If we apply Lilienthal's co-efficients for an angle of 6 degrees 26', we
      have for the force in action:
Normal: 4.57 X 1.063 X 0.912 = 4.42 pounds.

   Tangential: 4.57 X 1.063 X 0.074 = - 0.359 pounds,
   which latter, being negative, is a propelling force.
Results Astonish Scientists.
Thus we have a bird weighing 4.25 pounds not only thoroughly supported,
      but impelled forward by a force of 0.359 pounds, at seventeen miles per
      hour, while the experiments of Professor A. F. Zahm showed that the
      resistance at 15.52 miles per hour was only 0.27 pounds,
17 squared
   or 0.27 X ———- = 0.324 pounds, at seventeen miles an
             15.52 squared
   hour.
These are astonishing results from the data obtained, and they lead to the
      inquiry whether the energy of the rising air is sufficient to make up the
      losses which occur by reason of the resistance and friction of the bird's
      body and wings, which, being rounded, do not encounter air pressures in
      proportion to their maximum cross-section.
We have no accurate data upon the co-efficients to apply and estimates
      made by myself proved to be much smaller than the 0.27 pounds resistance
      measured by Professor Zahm, so that we will figure with the latter as
      modified. As the speed is seventeen miles per hour, or 24.93 feet per
      second, we have for the work:
Work done, 0.324 X 24.93 = 8.07 foot pounds per second.
Endorsed by Prof. Marvin.
Corresponding energy of rising air is not sufficient at four miles per
      hour. This amounts to but 2.10 foot pounds per second, but if we assume
      that the air was rising at the rate of seven miles per hour (10.26 feet
      per second), at which the pressure with the Langley coefficient would be
      0.16 pounds per square foot, we have on 4.57 square feet for energy of
      rising air: 4.57 X 0.16 X 10.26 = 7.50 foot pounds per second, which is
      seen to be still a little too small, but well within the limits of error,
      in view of the hollow shape of the bird's wings, which receive greater
      pressure than the flat planes experimented upon by Langley.
These computations were chiefly made in January, 1899, and were
      communicated to a few friends, who found no fallacy in them, but thought
      that few aviators would understand them if published. They were then
      submitted to Professor C. F. Marvin of the Weather Bureau, who is well
      known as a skillful physicist and mathematician. He wrote that they were,
      theoretically, entirely sound and quantitatively, probably, as accurate as
      the present state of the measurements of wind pressures permitted. The
      writer determined, however, to withhold publication until the feat of
      soaring flight had been performed by man, partly because he believed that,
      to ensure safety, it would be necessary that the machine should be
      equipped with a motor in order to supplement any deficiency in wind force.
Conditions Unfavorable for Wrights.
The feat would have been attempted in 1902 by Wright brothers if the local
      circumstances had been more favorable. They were experimenting on "Kill
      Devil Hill," near Kitty Hawk, N. C. This sand hill, about 100 feet high,
      is bordered by a smooth beach on the side whence come the sea breezes, but
      has marshy ground at the back. Wright brothers were apprehensive that if
      they rose on the ascending current of air at the front and began to circle
      like the birds, they might be carried by the descending current past the
      back of the hill and land in the marsh. Their gliding machine offered no
      greater head resistance in proportion than the buzzard, and their gliding
      angles of descent are practically as favorable, but the birds performed
      higher up in the air than they.
Langley's Idea of Aviation.
Professor Langley said in concluding his paper upon "The Internal Work of
      the Wind":
"The final application of these principles to the art of aerodromics
      seems, then, to be, that while it is not likely that the perfected
      aerodrome will ever be able to dispense altogether with the ability to
      rely at intervals on some internal source of power, it will not be
      indispensable that this aerodrome of the future shall, in order to go any
      distance—even to circumnavigate the globe without alighting—need
      to carry a weight of fuel which would enable it to perform this journey
      under conditions analogous to those of a steamship, but that the fuel and
      weight need only be such as to enable it to take care of itself in
      exceptional moments of calm."
Now that dynamic flying machines have been evolved and are being brought
      under control, it seems to be worth while to make these computations and
      the succeeding explanations known, so that some bold man will attempt the
      feat of soaring like a bird. The theory underlying the performance in a
      rising wind is not new, it has been suggested by Penaud and others, but it
      has attracted little attention because the exact data and the maneuvers
      required were not known and the feat had not yet been performed by a man.
      The puzzle has always been to account for the observed act in very light
      winds, and it is hoped that by the present selection of the most difficult
      case to explain—i. e., the soaring in a dead horizontal calm—somebody
      will attempt the exploit.
Requisites for Soaring Flights.
The following are deemed to be the requisites and maneuvers to master the
      secrets of soaring flight:
1st—Develop a dynamic flying machine weighing about one pound per
      square foot of area, with stable equilibrium and under perfect control,
      capable of gliding by gravity at angles of one in ten (5 3/4 degrees) in
      still air.
2nd.—Select locations where soaring birds abound and occasions where
      rising trends of gentle winds are frequent and to be relied on.
3rd.—Obtain an initial velocity of at least 25 feet per second
      before attempting to soar.
4th.—So locate the center of gravity that the apparatus shall assume
      a negative angle, fore and aft, of about 3 degrees.
Calculations show, however, that sufficient propelling force may still
      exist at 0 degrees, but disappears entirely at +4 degrees.
5th.—Circle like the bird. Simultaneously with the steering, incline
      the apparatus to the side toward which it is desired to turn, so that the
      centrifugal force shall be balanced by the centripetal force. The amount
      of the required inclination depends upon the speed and on the radius of
      the circle swept over.
6th.—Rise spirally like the bird. Steer with the horizontal rudder,
      so as to descend slightly when going with the wind and to ascend when
      going against the wind. The bird circles over one spot because the rising
      trends of wind are generally confined to small areas or local chimneys, as
      pointed out by Sir H. Maxim and others.
7th.—Once altitude is gained, progress may be made in any direction
      by gliding downward by gravity.
The bird's flying apparatus and skill are as yet infinitely superior to
      those of man, but there are indications that within a few years the latter
      may evolve more accurately proportioned apparatus and obtain absolute
      control over it.
It is hoped, therefore, that if there be found no radical error in the
      above computations, they will carry the conviction that soaring flight is
      not inaccessible to man, as it promises great economies of motive power in
      favorable localities of rising winds.
The writer will be grateful to experts who may point out any mistake
      committed in data or calculations, and will furnish additional information
      to any aviator who may wish to attempt the feat of soaring.