CHAPTER IX. SELECTION OF THE MOTOR.
Motors for flying machines must be light in weight, of great strength,
      productive of extreme speed, and positively dependable in action. It
      matters little as to the particular form, or whether air or water cooled,
      so long as the four features named are secured. There are at least a dozen
      such motors or engines now in use. All are of the gasolene type, and all
      possess in greater or lesser degree the desired qualities. Some of these
      motors are:
Renault—8-cylinder, air-cooled; 50 horse power; weight 374 pounds.
Fiat—8-cylinder, air-cooled; 50 horse power; weight 150 pounds.
Farcot—8-cylinder, air-cooled; from 30 to 100 horse power, according
      to bore of cylinders; weight of smallest, 84 pounds.
R. E. P.—10-cylinder, air-cooled; 150 horse power; weight 215
      pounds.
Gnome—7 and 14 cylinders, revolving type, air-cooled; 50 and 100
      horse power; weight 150 and 300 pounds.
Darracq—2 to 14 cylinders, water cooled; 30 to 200 horse power;
      weight of smallest 100 pounds.
Wright—4-cylinder, water-cooled; 25 horse power; weight 200 pounds.
Antoinette—8 and 16-cylinder, water-cooled; 50 and 100 horse power;
      weight 250 and 500 pounds.
E. N. V.—8-cylinder, water-cooled; from 30 to 80 horse power,
      according to bore of cylinder; weight 150 to 400 pounds.
Curtiss—8-cylinder, water-cooled; 60 horse power; weight 300 pounds.
Average Weight Per Horse Power.
It will be noticed that the Gnome motor is unusually light, being about
      three pounds to the horse power produced, as opposed to an average of 4
      1/2 pounds per horse power in other makes. This result is secured by the
      elimination of the fly-wheel, the engine itself revolving, thus obtaining
      the same effect that would be produced by a fly-wheel. The Farcot is even
      lighter, being considerably less than three pounds per horse power, which
      is the nearest approach to the long-sought engine equipment that will make
      possible a complete flying machine the total weight of which will not
      exceed one pound per square foot of area.
How Lightness Is Secured.
Thus far foreign manufacturers are ahead of Americans in the production of
      light-weight aerial motors, as is evidenced by the Gnome and Farcot
      engines, both of which are of French make. Extreme lightness is made
      possible by the use of fine, specially prepared steel for the cylinders,
      thus permitting them to be much thinner than if ordinary forms of steel
      were used. Another big saving in weight is made by substituting what are
      known as "auto lubricating" alloys for bearings. These alloys are made of
      a combination of aluminum and magnesium.
Still further gains are made in the use of alloy steel tubing instead of
      solid rods, and also by the paring away of material wherever it can be
      done without sacrificing strength. This plan, with the exclusive use of
      the best grades of steel, regardless of cost, makes possible a marked
      reduction in weight.
Multiplicity of Cylinders.
Strange as it may seem, multiplicity of cylinders does not always add
      proportionate weight. Because a 4-cylinder motor weighs say 100 pounds, it
      does not necessarily follow that an 8-cylinder equipment will weigh 200
      pounds. The reason of this will be plain when it is understood that many
      of the parts essential to a 4-cylinder motor will fill the requirements of
      an 8-cylinder motor without enlargement or addition.
Neither does multiplying the cylinders always increase the horsepower
      proportionately. If a 4-cylinder motor is rated at 25 horsepower it is not
      safe to take it for granted that double the number of cylinders will give
      50 horsepower. Generally speaking, eight cylinders, the bore, stroke and
      speed being the same, will give double the power that can be obtained from
      four, but this does not always hold good. Just why this exception should
      occur is not explainable by any accepted rule.
Horse Power and Speed.
Speed is an important requisite in a flying-machine motor, as the velocity
      of the aeroplane is a vital factor in flotation. At first thought, the
      propeller and similar adjuncts being equal, the inexperienced mind would
      naturally argue that a 50-horsepower engine should produce just double the
      speed of one of 25-horsepower. That this is a fallacy is shown by actual
      performances. The Wrights, using a 25-horsepower motor, have made 44 miles
      an hour, while Bleriot, with a 50-horsepower motor, has a record of a
      short-distance flight at the rate of 52 miles an hour. The fact is that,
      so far as speed is concerned, much depends upon the velocity of the wind,
      the size and shape of the aeroplane itself, and the size, shape and
      gearing of the propeller. The stronger the wind is blowing the easier it
      will be for the aeroplane to ascend, but at the same time the more
      difficult it will be to make headway against the wind in a horizontal
      direction. With a strong head wind, and proper engine force, your machine
      will progress to a certain extent, but it will be at an angle. If the
      aviator desired to keep on going upward this would be all right, but there
      is a limit to the altitude which it is desirable to reach—from 100
      to 500 feet for experts—and after that it becomes a question of
      going straight ahead.
Great Waste of Power.
One thing is certain—even in the most efficient of modern aerial
      motors there is a great loss of power between the two points of production
      and effect. The Wright outfit, which is admittedly one of the most
      effective in use, takes one horsepower of force for the raising and
      propulsion of each 50 pounds of weight. This, for a 25-horsepower engine,
      would give a maximum lifting capacity of 1250 pounds. It is doubtful if
      any of the higher rated motors have greater efficiency. As an 8-cylinder
      motor requires more fuel to operate than a 4-cylinder, it naturally
      follows that it is more expensive to run than the smaller motor, and a
      normal increase in capacity, taking actual performances as a criterion, is
      lacking. In other words, what is the sense of using an 8-cylinder motor
      when one of 4 cylinders is sufficient?
What the Propeller Does.
Much of the efficiency of the motor is due to the form and gearing of the
      propeller. Here again, as in other vital parts of flying-machine
      mechanism, we have a wide divergence of opinion as to the best form. A
      fish makes progress through the water by using its fins and tail; a bird
      makes its way through the air in a similar manner by the use of its wings
      and tail. In both instances the motive power comes from the body of the
      fish or bird.
In place of fins or wings the flying machine is equipped with a propeller,
      the action of which is furnished by the engine. Fins and wings have been
      tried, but they don't work.
While operating on the same general principle, aerial propellers are much
      larger than those used on boats. This is because the boat propeller has a
      denser, more substantial medium to work in (water), and consequently can
      get a better "hold," and produce more propulsive force than one of the
      same size revolving in the air. This necessitates the aerial propellers
      being much larger than those employed for marine purposes. Up to this
      point all aviators agree, but as to the best form most of them differ.
Kinds of Propellers Used.
One of the most simple is that used by Curtiss. It consists of two
      pear-shaped blades of laminated wood, each blade being 5 inches wide at
      its extreme point, tapering slightly to the shaft connection. These blades
      are joined at the engine shaft, in a direct line. The propeller has a
      pitch of 5 feet, and weighs, complete, less than 10 pounds. The length
      from end to end of the two blades is 6 1/2 feet.
Wright uses two wooden propellers, in the rear of his biplane, revolving
      in opposite directions. Each propeller is two-bladed.
Bleriot also uses a two-blade wooden propeller, but it is placed in front
      of his machine. The blades are each about 3 1/2 feet long and have an
      acute "twist."
Santos-Dumont uses a two-blade wooden propeller, strikingly similar to the
      Bleriot.
On the Antoinette monoplane, with which good records have been made, the
      propeller consists of two spoon-shaped pieces of metal, joined at the
      engine shaft in front, and with the concave surfaces facing the machine.
The propeller on the Voisin biplane is also of metal, consisting of two
      aluminum blades connected by a forged steel arm.
Maximum thrust, or stress—exercise of the greatest air-displacing
      force—is the object sought. This, according to experts, is best
      obtained with a large propeller diameter and reasonably low speed. The
      diameter is the distance from end to end of the blades, which on the
      largest propellers ranges from 6 to 8 feet. The larger the blade surface
      the greater will be the volume of air displaced, and, following this, the
      greater will be the impulse which forces the aeroplane ahead. In all
      centrifugal motion there is more or less tendency to disintegration in the
      form of "flying off" from the center, and the larger the revolving object
      is the stronger is this tendency. This is illustrated in the many
      instances in which big grindstones and fly-wheels have burst from being
      revolved too fast. To have a propeller break apart in the air would
      jeopardize the life of the aviator, and to guard against this it has been
      found best to make its revolving action comparatively slow. Besides this
      the slow motion (it is only comparatively slow) gives the atmosphere a
      chance to refill the area disturbed by one propeller blade, and thus have
      a new surface for the next blade to act upon.
Placing of the Motor.
As on other points, aviators differ widely in their ideas as to the proper
      position for the motor. Wright locates his on the lower plane, midway
      between the front and rear edges, but considerably to one side of the
      exact center. He then counter-balances the engine weight by placing his
      seat far enough away in the opposite direction to preserve the center of
      gravity. This leaves a space in the center between the motor and the
      operator in which a passenger may be carried without disturbing the
      equilibrium.
Bleriot, on the contrary, has his motor directly in front and preserves
      the center of gravity by taking his seat well back, this, with the weight
      of the aeroplane, acting as a counter-balance.
On the Curtiss machine the motor is in the rear, the forward seat of the
      operator, and weight of the horizontal rudder and damping plane in front
      equalizing the engine weight.
No Perfect Motor as Yet.
Engine makers in the United States, England, France and Germany are all
      seeking to produce an ideal motor for aviation purposes. Many of the
      productions are highly creditable, but it may be truthfully said that none
      of them quite fill the bill as regards a combination of the minimum of
      weight with the maximum of reliable maintained power. They are all, in
      some respects, improvements upon those previously in use, but the great
      end sought for has not been fully attained.
One of the motors thus produced was made by the French firm of Darracq at
      the suggestion of Santos Dumont, and on lines laid down by him. Santos
      Dumont wanted a 2-cylinder horizontal motor capable of developing 30
      horsepower, and not exceeding 4 1/2 pounds per horsepower in weight.
There can be no question as to the ability and skill of the Darracq
      people, or of their desire to produce a motor that would bring new credit
      and prominence to the firm. Neither could anything radically wrong be
      detected in the plans. But the motor, in at least one important
      requirement, fell short of expectations.
It could not be depended upon to deliver an energy of 30 horsepower
      continuously for any length of time. Its maximum power could be secured
      only in "spurts."
This tends to show how hard it is to produce an ideal motor for aviation
      purposes. Santos Dumont, of undoubted skill and experience as an aviator,
      outlined definitely what he wanted; one of the greatest designers in the
      business drew the plans, and the famous house of Darracq bent its best
      energies to the production. But the desired end was not fully attained.
Features of Darracq Motor.
Horizontal motors were practically abandoned some time ago in favor of the
      vertical type, but Santos Dumont had a logical reason for reverting to
      them. He wanted to secure a lower center of gravity than would be possible
      with a vertical engine. Theoretically his idea was correct as the
      horizontal motor lies flat, and therefore offers less resistance to the
      wind, but it did not work out as desired.
At the same time it must be admitted that this Darracq motor is a marvel
      of ingenuity and exquisite workmanship. The two cylinders, having a bore
      of 5 1-10 inches and a stroke of 4 7-10 inches, are machined out of a
      solid bar of steel until their weight is only 8 4-5 pounds complete. The
      head is separate, carrying the seatings for the inlet and exhaust valves,
      is screwed onto the cylinder, and then welded in position. A copper
      water-jacket is fitted, and it is in this condition that the weight of 8
      4-5 pounds is obtained.
On long trips, especially in regions where gasolene is hard to get, the
      weight of the fuel supply is an important feature in aviation. As a
      natural consequence flying machine operators favor the motor of greatest
      economy in gasolene consumption, provided it gives the necessary power.
An American inventor, Ramsey by name, is working on a motor which is said
      to possess great possibilities in this line. Its distinctive features
      include a connecting rod much shorter than usual, and a crank shaft
      located the length of the crank from the central axis of the cylinder.
      This has the effect of increasing the piston stroke, and also of
      increasing the proportion of the crank circle during which effective
      pressure is applied to the crank.
Making the connecting rod shorter and leaving the crank mechanism the same
      would introduce excessive cylinder friction. This Ramsey overcomes by the
      location of his crank shaft. The effect of the long piston stroke thus
      secured, is to increase the expansion of the gases, which in turn
      increases the power of the engine without increasing the amount of fuel
      used.
Propeller Thrust Important.
There is one great principle in flying machine propulsion which must not
      be overlooked. No matter how powerful the engine may be unless the
      propeller thrust more than overcomes the wind pressure there can be no
      progress forward. Should the force of this propeller thrust and that of
      the wind pressure be equal the result is obvious. The machine is at a
      stand-still so far as forward progress is concerned and is deprived of the
      essential advancing movement.
Speed not only furnishes sustentation for the airship, but adds to the
      stability of the machine. An aeroplane which may be jerky and uncertain in
      its movements, so far as equilibrium is concerned, when moving at a slow
      gait, will readily maintain an even keel when the speed is increased.
Designs for Propeller Blades.
It is the object of all men who design propellers to obtain the maximum of
      thrust with the minimum expenditure of engine energy. With this purpose in
      view many peculiar forms of propeller blades have been evolved. In theory
      it would seem that the best effects could be secured with blades so shaped
      as to present a thin (or cutting) edge when they come out of the wind, and
      then at the climax of displacement afford a maximum of surface so as to
      displace as much air as possible. While this is the form most generally
      favored there are others in successful operation.
There is also wide difference in opinion as to the equipment of the
      propeller shaft with two or more blades. Some aviators use two and some
      four. All have more or less success. As a mathematical proposition it
      would seem that four blades should give more propulsive force than two,
      but here again comes in one of the puzzles of aviation, as this result is
      not always obtained.
Difference in Propeller Efficiency.
That there is a great difference in propeller efficiency is made readily
      apparent by the comparison of effects produced in two leading makes of
      machines—the Wright and the Voisin.
In the former a weight of from 1,100 to 1,200 pounds is sustained and
      advance progress made at the rate of 40 miles an hour and more, with half
      the engine speed of a 25 horse-power motor. This would be a sustaining
      capacity of 48 pounds per horsepower. But the actual capacity of the
      Wright machine, as already stated, is 50 pounds per horsepower.
The Voisin machine, with aviator, weighs about 1,370 pounds, and is
      operated with a so-horsepower motor. Allowing it the same speed as the
      Wright we find that, with double the engine energy, the lifting capacity
      is only 27 1/2 pounds per horsepower. To what shall we charge this
      remarkable difference? The surface of the planes is exactly the same in
      both machines so there is no advantage in the matter of supporting area.
Comparison of Two Designs.
On the Wright machine two wooden propellers of two blades each (each blade
      having a decided "twist") are used. As one 25 horsepower motor drives both
      propellers the engine energy amounts to just one-half of this for each, or
      12 1/2 horsepower. And this energy is utilized at one-half the normal
      engine speed.
On the Voisin a radically different system is employed. Here we have one
      metal two-bladed propeller with a very slight "twist" to the blade
      surfaces. The full energy of a 50-horsepower motor is utilized.
Experts Fail to Agree.
Why should there be such a marked difference in the results obtained? Who
      knows? Some experts maintain that it is because there are two propellers
      on the Wright machine and only one on the Voisin, and consequently double
      the propulsive power is exerted. But this is not a fair deduction, unless
      both propellers are of the same size. Propulsive power depends upon the
      amount of air displaced, and the energy put into the thrust which
      displaces the air.
Other experts argue that the difference in results may be traced to the
      difference in blade design, especially in the matter of "twist."
The fact is that propeller results depend largely upon the nature of the
      aeroplanes on which they are used. A propeller, for instance, which gives
      excellent results on one type of aeroplane, will not work satisfactorily
      on another.
There are some features, however, which may be safely adopted in propeller
      selection. These are: As extensive a diameter as possible; blade area 10
      to 15 per cent of the area swept; pitch four-fifths of the diameter;
      rotation slow. The maximum of thrust effort will be thus obtained.