CHAPTER XIX. LAW OF THE AIRSHIP.
Successful aviation has evoked some peculiar things in the way of legal
      action and interpretation of the law.
It is well understood that a man's property cannot be used without his
      consent. This is an old established principle in common law which holds
      good today.
The limits of a man's property lines, however, have not been so well
      understood by laymen. According to eminent legal authorities such as
      Blackstone, Littleton and Coke, the "fathers of the law," the owner of
      realty also holds title above and below the surface, and this theory is
      generally accepted without question by the courts.
Rights of Property Owners.
In other words the owner of realty also owns the sky above it without
      limit as to distance. He can dig as deep into his land, or go as high into
      the air as he desires, provided he does not trespass upon or injure
      similar rights of others.
The owner of realty may resist by force, all other means having failed,
      any trespass upon, or invasion of his property. Other people, for
      instance, may not enter upon it, or over or under it, without his express
      permission and consent. There is only one exception, and this is in the
      case of public utility corporations such as railways which, under the law
      of eminent domain, may condemn a right of way across the property of an
      obstinate owner who declines to accept a fair price for the privilege.
Privilege Sharply Confined.
The law of eminent domain may be taken advantage of only by corporations
      which are engaged in serving the public. It is based upon the principle
      that the advancement and improvement of a community is of more importance
      and carries with it more rights than the interests of the individual
      owner. But even in cases where the right of eminent domain is exercised
      there can be no confiscation of the individual's property.
Exercising the right of eminent domain is merely obtaining by public
      purchase what is held to be essential to the public good, and which cannot
      be secured by private purchase. When eminent domain proceedings are
      resorted to the court appoints appraisers who determine upon the value of
      the property wanted, and this value (in money) is paid to the owner.
How It Affects Aviation.
It should be kept in mind that this privilege of the "right of eminent
      domain" is accorded only to corporations which are engaged in serving the
      public. Individuals cannot take advantage of it. Thus far all aviation has
      been conducted by individuals; there are no flying machine or airship
      corporations regularly engaged in the transportation of passengers, mails
      or freight.
This leads up to the question "What would happen if realty owners
      generally, or in any considerable numbers, should prohibit the navigation
      of the air above their holdings?" It is idle to say such a possibility is
      ridiculous—it is already an actuality in a few individual instances.
One property owner in New Jersey, a justice of the peace, maintains a
      large sign on the roof of his house warning aviators that they must not
      trespass upon his domain. That he is acting well within his rights in
      doing this is conceded by legal authorities.
Hard to Catch Offenders.
But, suppose the alleged trespass is committed, what is the property owner
      going to do about it? He must first catch the trespasser and this would be
      a pretty hard job. He certainly could not overtake him, unless he kept a
      racing aeroplane for this special purpose. It would be equally difficult
      to identify the offender after the offense had been committed, even if he
      were located, as aeroplanes carry no license numbers.
Allowing that the offender should be caught the only recourse of the
      realty owner is an action for damages. He may prevent the commission of
      the offense by force if necessary, but after it is committed he can only
      sue for damages. And in doing this he would have a lot of trouble.
Points to Be Proven.
One of the first things the plaintiff would be called upon to prove would
      be the elevation of the machine. If it were reasonably close to the ground
      there would, of course, be grave risk of damage to fences, shrubbery, and
      other property, and the court would be justified in holding it to be a
      nuisance that should be suppressed.
If, on the other hand; the machine was well up in the air, but going
      slowly, or hovering over the plaintiff's property, the court might be
      inclined to rule that it could not possibly be a nuisance, but right here
      the court would be in serious embarrassment. By deciding that it was not a
      nuisance he would virtually override the law against invasion of a man's
      property without his consent regardless of the nature of the invasion. By
      the same decision he would also say in effect that, if one flying machine
      could do this a dozen or more would have equal right to do the same thing.
      While one machine hovering over a certain piece of property may be no
      actual nuisance a dozen or more in the same position could hardly be
      excused.
Difficult to Fix Damages.
Such a condition would tend to greatly increase the risk of accident,
      either through collision, or by the carelessness of the aviators in
      dropping articles which might cause damages to the people or property
      below. In such a case it would undoubtedly be a nuisance, and in addition
      to a fine, the offender would also be liable for the damages.
Taking it for granted that no actual damage is done, and the owner merely
      sues on account of the invasion of his property, how is the amount of
      compensation to be fixed upon? The owner has lost nothing; no part of his
      possessions has been taken away; nothing has been injured or destroyed;
      everything is left in exactly the same condition as before the invasion.
      And yet, if the law is strictly interpreted, the offender is liable.
Right of Way for Airships.
Somebody has suggested the organization of flying-machine corporations as
      common carriers, which would give them the right of eminent domain with
      power to condemn a right of way. But what would they condemn? There is
      nothing tangible in the air. Railways in condemning a right of way specify
      tangible property (realty) within certain limits. How would an aviator
      designate any particular right of way through the air a certain number of
      feet in width, and a certain distance from the ground?
And yet, should the higher courts hold to the letter of the law and decide
      that aviators have no right to navigate their craft over private property,
      something will have to be done to get them out of the dilemma, as aviation
      is too far advanced to be discarded. Fortunately there is little prospect
      of any widespread antagonism among property owners so long as aviators
      refrain from making nuisances of themselves.
Possible Solution Offered.
One possible solution is offered and that is to confine the path of
      airships to the public highways so that nobody's property rights would be
      invaded. In addition, as a matter of promoting safety for both operators
      and those who may happen to be beneath the airships as they pass over a
      course, adoption of the French rules are suggested. These are as follows:
Aeroplanes, when passing, must keep to the right, and pass at a distance
      of at least 150 feet. They are free from this rule when flying at
      altitudes of more than 100 feet. Every machine when flying at night or
      during foggy weather must carry a green light on the right, and a red
      light on the left, and a white headlight on the front.
These are sensible rules, but may be improved upon by the addition of a
      signal system of some kind, either horn, whistle or bell.
Responsibility of Aviators.
Mr. Jay Carver Bossard, in recent numbers of Fly, brings out some
      curious and interesting legal points in connection with aviation, among
      which are the following:
Fly
"Private parties who possess aerial craft, and desire to operate the same
      in aerial territory other than their own, must obtain from land owners
      special permission to do so, such permission to be granted only by
      agreement, founded upon a valid consideration. Otherwise, passing over
      another's land will in each instance amount to a trespass.
"Leaving this highly technical side of the question, let us turn to
      another view: the criminal and tort liability of owners and operators to
      airship passengers. If A invites B to make an ascension with him in his
      machine, and B, knowing that A is merely an enthusiastic amateur and far
      from being an expert, accepts and is through A's innocent negligence
      injured, he has no grounds for recovery. But if A contracts with B, to
      transport him from one place to another, for a consideration, and B is
      injured by the poor piloting of A, A would be liable to B for damages
      which would result. Now in order to safeguard such people as B, curious to
      the point of recklessness, the law will have to require all airship
      operators to have a license, and to secure this license airship pilots
      will have to meet certain requirements. Here again is a question. Who is
      going to say whether an applicant is competent to pilot a balloon or
      airship?
Fine for an Aeronaut.
"An aeroplane while maneuvering is suddenly caught by a treacherous gale
      and swept to the ground. A crowd of people hasten over to see if the
      aeronaut is injured, and in doing so trample over Tax-payer Smith's
      garden, much to the detriment of his growing vegetables and flowers. Who
      is liable for the damages? Queer as it may seem, a case very similar to
      this was decided in 1823, in the New York supreme court, and it was held
      that the aeronaut was liable upon the following grounds: 'To render one
      man liable in trespass for the acts of others, it must appear either that
      they acted in concert, or that the act of the one, ordinarily and
      naturally produced the acts of the others, Ascending in a balloon is not
      an unlawful act, but it is certain that the aeronaut has no control over
      its motion horizontally, but is at the sport of the wind, and is to
      descend when and how he can. His reaching the earth is a matter of hazard.
      If his descent would according to the circumstances draw a crowd of people
      around him, either out of curiosity, or for the purpose of rescuing him
      from a perilous situation, all this he ought to have foreseen, and must be
      responsible for.'
Air Not Really Free.
"The general belief among people is, that the air is free. Not only free
      to breathe and enjoy, but free to travel in, and that no one has any
      definite jurisdiction over, or in any part of it. Now suppose this were
      made a legal doctrine. Would a murder perpetrated above the clouds have to
      go unpunished? Undoubtedly. For felonies committed upon the high seas
      ample provision is made for their punishment, but new provisions will have
      to be made for crimes committed in the air.
Relations of Owner and Employee.
"It is a general rule of law that a master is bound to provide reasonably
      safe tools, appliances and machines for his servant. How this rule is
      going to be applied in cases of aeroplanes, remains to be seen. The
      aeroplane owner who hires a professional aeronaut, that is, one who has
      qualified as an expert, owes him very little legal duty to supply him with
      a perfect aeroplane. The expert is supposed to know as much regarding the
      machine as the owner, if not more, and his acceptance of his position
      relieves the owner from liability. When the owner hires an amateur
      aeronaut to run the aeroplane, and teaches him how to manipulate it, even
      though the prescribed manner of manipulation will make flight safe,
      nevertheless if the machine is visibly defective, or known to be so, any
      injury which results to the aeronaut the owner is liable for.
As to Aeroplane Contracts.
"At the present time there are many orders being placed with aeroplane
      manufacturing companies. There are some unique questions to be raised here
      under the law of contract. It is an elementary principle of law that no
      one can be compelled to complete a contract which in itself is impossible
      to perform. For instance, a contract to row a boat across the Atlantic in
      two weeks, for a consideration, could never be enforced because it is
      within judicial knowledge that such an undertaking is beyond human power.
      Again, contracts formed for the doing of acts contrary to nature are never
      enforcible, and here is where our difficulty comes in. Is it possible to
      build a machine or species of craft which will transport a person or goods
      through the air? The courts know that balloons are practical; that is,
      they know that a bag filled with gas has a lifting power and can move
      through the air at an appreciable height. Therefore, a contract to
      transport a person in such manner is a good contract, and the conditions
      being favorable could undoubtedly be enforced. But the passengers' right
      of action for injury would be very limited.
No Redress for Purchasers.
"In the case of giving warranties on aeroplanes, we have yet to see just
      what a court is going to say. It is easy enough for a manufacturer to
      guarantee to build a machine of certain dimensions and according to
      certain specifications, but when he inserts a clause in the contract to
      the effect that the machine will raise itself from the surface of the
      earth, defy the laws of gravity, and soar in the heavens at the will of
      the aviator, he is to say the least contracting to perform a miracle.
"Until aeroplanes have been made and accepted as practical, no court will
      force a manufacturer to turn out a machine guaranteed to fly. So
      purchasers can well remember that if their machines refuse to fly they
      have no redress against the maker, for he can always say, 'The industry is
      still in its experimental stage.' In contracting for an engine no builder
      will guarantee that the particular engine will successfully operate the
      aeroplane. In fact he could never be forced to live up to such an
      agreement, should he agree to a stipulation of that sort. The best any
      engine maker will guarantee is to build an engine according to
      specifications."