CHAPTER X. PROPER DIMENSIONS OF MACHINES.
In laying out plans for a flying machine the first thing to decide upon is
      the size of the plane surfaces. The proportions of these must be based
      upon the load to be carried. This includes the total weight of the machine
      and equipment, and also the operator. This will be a rather difficult
      problem to figure out exactly, but practical approximate figures may be
      reached.
It is easy to get at the weight of the operator, motor and propeller, but
      the matter of determining, before they are constructed, what the planes,
      rudders, auxiliaries, etc., will weigh when completed is an intricate
      proposition. The best way is to take the dimensions of some successful
      machine and use them, making such alterations in a minor way as you may
      desire.
Dimensions of Leading Machines.
In the following tables will be found the details as to surface area,
      weight, power, etc., of the nine principal types of flying machines which
      are now prominently before the public:
MONOPLANES.
                              Surface area    Spread in     Depth in
   Make          Passengers     sq. feet      linear feet  linear
   feet
   Santos-Dumont.. 1           110             16.0         26.0
   Bleriot..... 1           150.6           24.6         22.0
   R. E. P..... 1           215             34.1         28.9
   Bleriot..... 2           236             32.9         23.0
   Antoinette.... 2           538             41.2         37.9
                  No. of                  Weight Without
   Propeller
   Make         Cylinders   Horse Power       Operator
   Diameter
   Santos-Dumont.. 2          30                250            5.0
   Bleriot..... 3          25                680            6.9
   R. E. P..... 7          35                900            6.6
   Bleriot..... 7          50              1,240            8.1
   Antoinette... 8          50              1,040            7.2

                               BIPLANES.
                            Surface Area       Spread in      Depth
   in
   Make      Passengers       sq. feet        linear feet    linear
   feet
   Curtiss... 2               258             29.0
   28.7
   Wright.... 2               538             41.0
   30.7
   Farman.... 2               430             32.9
   39.6
   Voisin.... 2               538             37.9
   39.6

                No. of                     Weight Without
   Propeller
   Make       Cylinders      Horse Power      Operator
   Diameter
   Curtiss... 8               50               600          6.0
   Wright.... 4               25             1,100          8.1
   Farman.... 7               50             1,200          8.9
   Voisin.... 8               50             1,200          6.6
In giving the depth dimensions the length over all—from the extreme
      edge of the front auxiliary plane to the extreme tip of the rear is
      stated. Thus while the dimensions of the main planes of the Wright machine
      are 41 feet spread by 6 1/2 feet in depth, the depth over all is 30.7.
Figuring Out the Details.
With this data as a guide it should be comparatively easy to decide upon
      the dimensions of the machine required. In arriving at the maximum lifting
      capacity the weight of the operator must be added. Assuming this to
      average 170 pounds the method of procedure would be as follows:
Add the weight of the operator to the weight of the complete machine. The
      new Wright machine complete weighs 900 pounds. This, plus 170, the weight
      of the operator, gives a total of 1,070 pounds. There are 538 square feet
      of supporting surface, or practically one square foot of surface area to
      each two pounds of load.
There are some machines, notably the Bleriot, in which the supporting
      power is much greater. In this latter instance we find a surface area of
      150 1/2 square feet carrying a load of 680 plus 170, or an aggregate of
      850 pounds. This is the equivalent of five pounds to the square foot. This
      ratio is phenomenally large, and should not be taken as a guide by
      amateurs.
The Matter of Passengers.
These deductions are based on each machine carrying one passenger, which
      is admittedly the limit at present of the monoplanes like those operated
      for record-making purposes by Santos-Dumont and Bleriot. The biplanes,
      however, have a two-passenger capacity, and this adds materially to the
      proportion of their weight-sustaining power as compared with the surface
      area. In the following statement all the machines are figured on the
      one-passenger basis. Curtiss and Wright have carried two passengers on
      numerous occasions, and an extra 170 pounds should therefore be added to
      the total weight carried, which would materially increase the capacity.
      Even with the two-passenger load the limit is by no means reached, but as
      experiments have gone no further it is impossible to make more accurate
      figures.
Average Proportions of Load.
It will be interesting, before proceeding to lay out the dimension
      details, to make a comparison of the proportion of load effect with the
      supporting surfaces of various well-known machines. Here are the figures:
Santos-Dumont—A trifle under four pounds per square foot.
Bleriot—Five pounds.
R. E. P.—Five pounds.
Antoinette—About two and one-quarter pounds.
Curtiss—About two and one-half pounds.
Wright—Two and one-quarter pounds.
Farman—A trifle over three pounds.
Voisin—A little under two and one-half pounds.
Importance of Engine Power.
While these figures are authentic, they are in a way misleading, as the
      important factor of engine power is not taken into consideration. Let us
      recall the fact that it is the engine power which keeps the machine in
      motion, and that it is only while in motion that the machine will remain
      suspended in the air. Hence, to attribute the support solely to the
      surface area is erroneous. True, that once under headway the planes
      contribute largely to the sustaining effect, and are absolutely essential
      in aerial navigation—the motor could not rise without them—still,
      when it comes to a question of weight-sustaining power, we must also
      figure on the engine capacity.
In the Wright machine, in which there is a lifting capacity of
      approximately 2 1/4 pounds to the square foot of surface area, an engine
      of only 25 horsepower is used. In the Curtiss, which has a lifting
      capacity of 2 1/2 pounds per square foot, the engine is of 50 horsepower.
      This is another of the peculiarities of aerial construction and
      navigation. Here we have a gain of 1/4 pound in weight-lifting capacity
      with an expenditure of double the horsepower. It is this feature which
      enables Curtiss to get along with a smaller surface area of supporting
      planes at the expense of a big increase in engine power. Proper Weight of
      Machine.
As a general proposition the most satisfactory machine for amateur
      purposes will be found to be one with a total weight-sustaining power of
      about 1,200 pounds. Deducting 170 pounds as the weight of the operator,
      this will leave 1,030 pounds for the complete motor-equipped machine, and
      it should be easy to construct one within this limit. This implies, of
      course, that due care will be taken to eliminate all superfluous weight by
      using the lightest material compatible with strength and safety.
This plan will admit of 686 pounds weight in the frame work, coverings,
      etc., and 344 for the motor, propeller, etc., which will be ample. Just
      how to distribute the weight of the planes is a matter which must be left
      to the ingenuity of the builder.
Comparison of Bird Power.
There is an interesting study in the accompanying illustration. Note that
      the surface area of the albatross is much smaller than that of the
      vulture, although the wing spread is about the same. Despite this the
      albatross accomplishes fully as much in the way of flight and soaring as
      the vulture. Why? Because the albaboss is quicker and more powerful in
      action. It is the application of this same principle in flying machines
      which enables those of great speed and power to get along with less
      supporting surface than those of slower movement.
Measurements of Curtiss Machine.
Some idea of framework proportion may be had from the following
      description of the Curtiss machine. The main planes have a spread (width)
      of 29 feet, and are 4 1/2 feet deep. The front double surface horizontal
      rudder is 6x2 feet, with an area of 24 square feet. To the rear of the
      main planes is a single surface horizontal plane 6x2 feet, with an area of
      12 square feet. In connection with this is a vertical rudder 2 1/2 feet
      square. Two movable ailerons, or balancing planes, are placed at the
      extreme ends of the upper planes. These are 6x2 feet, and have a combined
      area of 24 square feet. There is also a triangular shaped vertical
      steadying surface in connection with the front rudder.
Thus we have a total of 195 square feet, but as the official figures are
      258, and the size of the triangular-shaped steadying surface is unknown,
      we must take it for granted that this makes up the difference. In the
      matter of proportion the horizontal double-plane rudder is about one-tenth
      the size of the main plane, counting the surface area of only one plane,
      the vertical rudder one-fortieth, and the ailerons one-twentieth.