The Project Gutenberg eBook of Flying Machines: Construction and Operation
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.
Title: Flying Machines: Construction and Operation

Author: William J. Jackman
 Octave Chanute
 Thomas Herbert Russell

Release date: May 1, 1997 [eBook #907]
                Most recently updated: February 7, 2013
Language: English
Credits: Produced by Charles Keller, and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLYING MACHINES: CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION ***






      FLYING MACHINE: CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION
    




      By W.J. Jackman and Thos. H. Russell
    

 


      A Practical Book Which Shows, in Illustrations, Working Plans and Text,
      How to Build and Navigate the Modern Airship.
    

      W.J. JACKMAN, M.E., Author of "A B C of the Motorcycle," "Facts for
      Motorists," etc. etc.
    

      and
    

      THOS. H. RUSSELL, A.M., M.E., Charter Member of the Aero Club of Illinois,
      Author of "History of the Automobile," "Motor Boats: Construction and
      Operation," etc. etc.
    

      With Introductory Chapter By Octave Chanute, C.E., President Aero Club of
      Illinois
    

      1912
    


 








      PREFACE.
    

      This book is written for the guidance of the novice in aviation—the
      man who seeks practical information as to the theory, construction and
      operation of the modern flying machine. With this object in view the
      wording is intentionally plain and non-technical. It contains some
      propositions which, so far as satisfying the experts is concerned, might
      doubtless be better stated in technical terms, but this would defeat the
      main purpose of its preparation. Consequently, while fully aware of its
      shortcomings in this respect, the authors have no apologies to make.
    

      In the stating of a technical proposition so it may be clearly understood
      by people not versed in technical matters it becomes absolutely necessary
      to use language much different from that which an expert would employ, and
      this has been done in this volume.
    

      No man of ordinary intelligence can read this book without obtaining a
      clear, comprehensive knowledge of flying machine construction and
      operation. He will learn, not only how to build, equip, and manipulate an
      aeroplane in actual flight, but will also gain a thorough understanding of
      the principle upon which the suspension in the air of an object much
      heavier than the air is made possible.
    

      This latter feature should make the book of interest even to those who
      have no intention of constructing or operating a flying machine. It will
      enable them to better understand and appreciate the performances of the
      daring men like the Wright brothers, Curtiss, Bleriot, Farman, Paulhan,
      Latham, and others, whose bold experiments have made aviation an
      actuality.
    

      For those who wish to engage in the fascinating pastime of construction
      and operation it is intended as a reliable, practical guide.
    

      It may be well to explain that the sub-headings in the articles by Mr.
      Chanute were inserted by the authors without his knowledge. The purpose of
      this was merely to preserve uniformity in the typography of the book. This
      explanation is made in justice to Mr. Chanute.
    

      THE AUTHORS. 
 








      IN MEMORIAM.
    

      Octave Chanute, "the father of the modern flying machine," died at his
      home in Chicago on November 23, 1910, at the age of 72 years. His last
      work in the interest of aviation was to furnish the introductory chapter
      to the first edition of this volume, and to render valuable assistance in
      the handling of the various subjects. He even made the trip from his home
      to the office of the publishers one inclement day last spring, to look
      over the proofs of the book and, at his suggestion, several important
      changes were made. All this was "a labor of love" on Mr. Chanute's part.
      He gave of his time and talents freely because he was enthusiastic in the
      cause of aviation, and because he knew the authors of this book and
      desired to give them material aid in the preparation of the work—a
      favor that was most sincerely appreciated.
    

      The authors desire to make acknowledgment of many courtesies in the way of
      valuable advice, information, etc., extended by Mr. Octave Chanute, C. E.,
      Mr. E. L. Jones, Editor of Aeronautics, and the publishers of, the New
      England Automobile Journal and Fly.
    

 



 



CONTENTS





 PREFACE. 


 IN MEMORIAM. 





 FLYING MACHINES: CONSTRUCTION and
        OPERATION 





 CHAPTER I. EVOLUTION OF TWO-SURFACE FLYING
        MACHINE. 


 CHAPTER II. THEORY, DEVELOPMENT, AND USE. 


 CHAPTER III. MECHANICAL BIRD ACTION 


 CHAPTER IV. VARIOUS FORMS OF FLYING MACHINES.
        


 CHAPTER V. CONSTRUCTING A GLIDING MACHINE. 


 CHAPTER VI. LEARNING TO FLY. 


 CHAPTER VII. PUTTING ON THE RUDDER. 


 CHAPTER VIII. THE REAL FLYING MACHINE. 


 CHAPTER IX. SELECTION OF THE MOTOR. 


 CHAPTER X. PROPER DIMENSIONS OF MACHINES. 


 CHAPTER XI. PLANE AND RUDDER CONTROL. 


 CHAPTER XII. HOW TO USE THE MACHINE. 


 CHAPTER XIII. PECULIARITIES OF AIRSHIP POWER.
        


 CHAPTER XIV. ABOUT WIND CURRENTS, ETC. 


 CHAPTER XV. THE ELEMENT OF DANGER. 


 CHAPTER XVI. RADICAL CHANGES BEING MADE. 


 CHAPTER XVII. SOME OF THE NEW DESIGNS. 


 CHAPTER XVIII. DEMAND FOR FLYING MACHINES. 


 CHAPTER XIX. LAW OF THE AIRSHIP. 


 CHAPTER XX. SOARING FLIGHT. 


 CHAPTER XXI. FLYING MACHINES VS. BALLOONS. 


 CHAPTER XXII. PROBLEMS OF AERIAL FLIGHT. 


 CHAPTER XXIII. AMATEURS MAY USE WRIGHT PATENTS.
        


 CHAPTER XXIV. HINTS ON PROPELLER CONSTRUCTION.
        


 CHAPTER XXV. NEW MOTORS AND DEVICES. 


 CHAPTER XXVI. MONOPLANES, TRIPLANES,
        MULTIPLANES. 


 CHAPTER XXVII. 1911 AEROPLANE RECORDS. 


 NOTABLE CROSS-COUNTRY FLIGHTS OF 1911. 


 CHAPTER XXVIII. GLOSSARY OF AERONAUTICAL TERMS.
        





 Footnotes: 



 



  
 


      FLYING MACHINES: CONSTRUCTION and OPERATION
    


 








      CHAPTER I. EVOLUTION OF TWO-SURFACE FLYING MACHINE.
    

      By Octave Chanute.
    

      I am asked to set forth the development of the "two-surface" type of
      flying machine which is now used with modifications by Wright Brothers,
      Farman, 1
      Delagrange, Herring and others.
    

      This type originated with Mr. F. H. Wenham, who patented it in England in
      1866 (No. 1571), taking out provisional papers only. In the abridgment of
      British patent Aeronautical Specifications (1893) it is described as
      follows:
    

      "Two or more aeroplanes are arranged one above the other, and support a
      framework or car containing the motive power. The aeroplanes are made of
      silk or canvas stretched on a frame by wooden rods or steel ribs. When
      manual power is employed the body is placed horizontally, and oars or
      propellers are actuated by the arms or legs.
    

      "A start may be obtained by lowering the legs and running down hill or the
      machine may be started from a moving carriage. One or more screw
      propellers may be applied for propelling when steam power is employed."
    

      On June 27, 1866, Mr. Wenham read before the "Aeronautical Society of
      Great Britain," then recently organized, the ablest paper ever presented
      to that society, and thereby breathed into it a spirit which has continued
      to this day. In this paper he described his observations of birds,
      discussed the laws governing flight as to the surfaces and power required
      both with wings and screws, and he then gave an account of his own
      experiments with models and with aeroplanes of sufficient size to carry
      the weight of a man.
    

      Second Wenham Aeroplane.
    

      His second aeroplane was sixteen feet from tip to tip. A trussed spar at
      the bottom carried six superposed bands of thin holland fabric fifteen
      inches wide, connected with vertical webs of holland two feet apart, thus
      virtually giving a length of wing of ninety-six feet and one hundred and
      twenty square feet of supporting surface. The man was placed horizontally
      on a base board beneath the spar. This apparatus when tried in the wind
      was found to be unmanageable by reason of the fluttering motions of the
      fabric, which was insufficiently stiffened with crinoline steel, but Mr.
      Wenham pointed out that this in no way invalidated the principle of the
      apparatus, which was to obtain large supporting surfaces without
      increasing unduly the leverage and consequent weight of spar required, by
      simply superposing the surfaces.
    

      This principle is entirely sound and it is surprising that it is, to this
      day, not realized by those aviators who are hankering for monoplanes.
    

      Experiments by Stringfellow.
    

      The next man to test an apparatus with superposed surfaces was Mr.
      Stringfellow, who, becoming much impressed with Mr. Wenham's proposal,
      produced a largish model at the exhibition of the Aeronautical Society in
      1868. It consisted of three superposed surfaces aggregating 28 square feet
      and a tail of 8 square feet more. The weight was under 12 pounds and it
      was driven by a central propeller actuated by a steam engine overestimated
      at one-third of a horsepower. It ran suspended to a wire on its trials but
      failed of free flight, in consequence of defective equilibrium. This
      apparatus has since been rebuilt and is now in the National Museum of the
      Smithsonian Institution at Washington. Linfield's Unsuccessful Efforts.
    

      In 1878 Mr. Linfield tested an apparatus in England consisting of a
      cigar-shaped car, to which was attached on each side frames five feet
      square, containing each twenty-five superposed planes of stretched and
      varnished linen eighteen inches wide, and only two inches apart, thus
      reminding one of a Spanish donkey with panniers. The whole weighed two
      hundred and forty pounds. This was tested by being mounted on a flat car
      behind a locomotive going 40 miles an hour. When towed by a line fifteen
      feet long the apparatus rose only a little from the car and exhibited such
      unstable equilibrium that the experiment was not renewed. The lift was
      only about one-third of what it would have been had the planes been
      properly spaced, say their full width apart, instead of one-ninth as
      erroneously devised.
    

      Renard's "Dirigible Parachute."
    

      In 1889 Commandant Renard, the eminent superintendent of the French
      Aeronautical Department, exhibited at the Paris Exposition of that year,
      an apparatus experimented with some years before, which he termed a
      "dirigible parachute." It consisted of an oviform body to which were
      pivoted two upright slats carrying above the body nine long superposed
      flat blades spaced about one-third of their width apart. When this
      apparatus was properly set at an angle to the longitudinal axis of the
      body and dropped from a balloon, it travelled back against the wind for a
      considerable distance before alighting. The course could be varied by a
      rudder. No practical application seems to have been made of this device by
      the French War Department, but Mr. J. P. Holland, the inventor of the
      submarine boat which bears his name, proposed in 1893 an arrangement of
      pivoted framework attached to the body of a flying machine which combines
      the principle of Commandant Renard with the curved blades experimented
      with by Mr. Phillips, now to be noticed, with the addition of lifting
      screws inserted among the blades.
    

      Phillips Fails on Stability Problem.
    

      In 1893 Mr. Horatio Phillips, of England, after some very interesting
      experiments with various wing sections, from which he deduced conclusions
      as to the shape of maximum lift, tested an apparatus resembling a Venetian
      blind which consisted of fifty wooden slats of peculiar shape, 22 feet
      long, one and a half inches wide, and two inches apart, set in ten
      vertical upright boards. All this was carried upon a body provided with
      three wheels. It weighed 420 pounds and was driven at 40 miles an hour on
      a wooden sidewalk by a steam engine of nine horsepower which actuated a
      two-bladed screw. The lift was satisfactory, being perhaps 70 pounds per
      horsepower, but the equilibrium was quite bad and the experiments were
      discontinued. They were taken up again in 1904 with a similar apparatus
      large enough to carry a passenger, but the longitudinal equilibrium was
      found to be defective. Then in 1907 a new machine was tested, in which
      four sets of frames, carrying similar sets of slat "sustainers" were
      inserted, and with this arrangement the longitudinal stability was found
      to be very satisfactory. The whole apparatus, with the operator, weighed
      650 pounds. It flew about 200 yards when driven by a motor of 20 to 22
      h.p. at 30 miles an hour, thus exhibiting a lift of about 32 pounds per
      h.p., while it will be remembered that the aeroplane of Wright Brothers
      exhibits a lifting capacity of 50 pounds to the h.p.
    

      Hargrave's Kite Experiments.
    

      After experimenting with very many models and building no less than
      eighteen monoplane flying model machines, actuated by rubber, by
      compressed air and by steam, Mr. Lawrence Hargrave, of Sydney, New South
      Wales, invented the cellular kite which bears his name and made it known
      in a paper contributed to the Chicago Conference on Aerial Navigation in
      1893, describing several varieties. The modern construction is well known,
      and consists of two cells, each of superposed surfaces with vertical side
      fins, placed one behind the other and connected by a rod or frame. This
      flies with great steadiness without a tail. Mr. Hargrave's idea was to use
      a team of these kites, below which he proposed to suspend a motor and
      propeller from which a line would be carried to an anchor in the ground.
      Then by actuating the propeller the whole apparatus would move forward,
      pick up the anchor and fly away. He said: "The next step is clear enough,
      namely, that a flying machine with acres of surface can be safely got
      under way or anchored and hauled to the ground by means of the string of
      kites."
    

      The first tentative experiments did not result well and emphasized the
      necessity for a light motor, so that Mr. Hargrave has since been engaged
      in developing one, not having convenient access to those which have been
      produced by the automobile designers and builders.
    

      Experiments With Glider Model.
    

      And here a curious reminiscence may be indulged in. In 1888 the present
      writer experimented with a two-cell gliding model, precisely similar to a
      Hargrave kite, as will be confirmed by Mr. Herring. It was frequently
      tested by launching from the top of a three-story house and glided
      downward very steadily in all sorts of breezes, but the angle of descent
      was much steeper than that of birds, and the weight sustained per square
      foot was less than with single cells, in consequence of the lesser support
      afforded by the rear cell, which operated upon air already set in motion
      downward by the front cell, so nothing more was done with it, for it never
      occurred to the writer to try it as a kite and he thus missed the
      distinction which attaches to Hargrave's name.
    

      Sir Hiram Maxim also introduced fore and aft superposed surfaces in his
      wondrous flying machine of 1893, but he relied chiefly for the lift upon
      his main large surface and this necessitated so many guys, to prevent
      distortion, as greatly to increase the head resistance and this, together
      with the unstable equilibrium, made it evident that the design of the
      machine would have to be changed.
    

      How Lilienthal Was Killed.
    

      In 1895, Otto Lilienthal, the father of modern aviation, the man to whose
      method of experimenting almost all present successes are due, after making
      something like two thousand glides with monoplanes, added a superposed
      surface to his apparatus and found the control of it much improved. The
      two surfaces were kept apart by two struts or vertical posts with a few
      guy wires, but the connecting joints were weak and there was nothing like
      trussing. This eventually cost his most useful life. Two weeks before that
      distressing loss to science, Herr Wilhelm Kress, the distinguished and
      veteran aviator of Vienna, witnessed a number of glides by Lilienthal with
      his double-decked apparatus. He noticed that it was much wracked and
      wobbly and wrote to me after the accident: "The connection of the wings
      and the steering arrangement were very bad and unreliable. I warned Herr
      Lilienthal very seriously. He promised me that he would soon put it in
      order, but I fear that he did not attend to it immediately."
    

      In point of fact, Lilienthal had built a new machine, upon a different
      principle, from which he expected great results, and intended to make but
      very few more flights with the old apparatus. He unwisely made one too
      many and, like Pilcher, was the victim of a distorted apparatus. Probably
      one of the joints of the struts gave way, the upper surface blew back and
      Lilienthal, who was well forward on the lower surface, was pitched
      headlong to destruction.
    

      Experiments by the Writer.
    

      In 1896, assisted by Mr. Herring and Mr. Avery, I experimented with
      several full sized gliding machines, carrying a man. The first was a
      Lilienthal monoplane which was deemed so cranky that it was discarded
      after making about one hundred glides, six weeks before Lilienthal's
      accident. The second was known as the multiple winged machine and finally
      developed into five pairs of pivoted wings, trussed together at the front
      and one pair in the rear. It glided at angles of descent of 10 or 11
      degrees or of one in five, and this was deemed too steep. Then Mr. Herring
      and myself made computations to analyze the resistances. We attributed
      much of them to the five front spars of the wings and on a sheet of
      cross-barred paper I at once drew the design for a new three-decked
      machine to be built by Mr. Herring.
    

      Being a builder of bridges, I trussed these surfaces together, in order to
      obtain strength and stiffness. When tested in gliding flight the lower
      surface was found too near the ground. It was taken off and the remaining
      apparatus now consisted of two surfaces connected together by a girder
      composed of vertical posts and diagonal ties, specifically known as a
      "Pratt truss." Then Mr. Herring and Mr. Avery together devised and put on
      an elastic attachment to the tail. This machine proved a success, it being
      safe and manageable. Over 700 glides were made with it at angles of
      descent of 8 to 10 degrees, or one in six to one in seven.
    

      First Proposed by Wenham.
    

      The elastic tail attachment and the trussing of the connecting frame of
      the superposed wings were the only novelties in this machine, for the
      superposing of the surfaces had first been proposed by Wenham, but in
      accordance with the popular perception, which bestows all the credit upon
      the man who adds the last touch making for success to the labors of his
      predecessors, the machine has since been known by many persons as the
      "Chanute type" of gliders, much to my personal gratification.
    

      It has since been improved in many ways. Wright Brothers, disregarding the
      fashion which prevails among birds, have placed the tail in front of their
      apparatus and called it a front rudder, besides placing the operator in
      horizontal position instead of upright, as I did; and also providing a
      method of warping the wings to preserve equilibrium. Farman and
      Delagrange, under the very able guidance and constructive work of Voisin
      brothers, then substituted many details, including a box tail for the
      dart-like tail which I used. This may have increased the resistance, but
      it adds to the steadiness. Now the tendency in France seems to be to go
      back to the monoplane.
    

      Monoplane Idea Wrong.
    

      The advocates of the single supporting surface are probably mistaken. It
      is true that a single surface shows a greater lift per square foot than
      superposed surfaces for a given speed, but the increased weight due to
      leverage more than counterbalances this advantage by requiring heavy spars
      and some guys. I believe that the future aeroplane dynamic flier will
      consist of superposed surfaces, and, now that it has been found that by
      imbedding suitably shaped spars in the cloth the head resistance may be
      much diminished, I see few objections to superposing three, four or even
      five surfaces properly trussed, and thus obtaining a compact, handy,
      manageable and comparatively light apparatus. 2



 








      CHAPTER II. THEORY, DEVELOPMENT, AND USE.
    

      While every craft that navigates the air is an airship, all airships are
      not flying machines. The balloon, for instance, is an airship, but it is
      not what is known among aviators as a flying machine. This latter term is
      properly used only in referring to heavier-than-air machines which have no
      gas-bag lifting devices, and are made to really fly by the application of
      engine propulsion.
    

      Mechanical Birds.
    

      All successful flying machines—and there are a number of them—are
      based on bird action. The various designers have studied bird flight and
      soaring, mastered its technique as devised by Nature, and the modern
      flying machine is the result. On an exaggerated, enlarged scale the
      machines which are now navigating the air are nothing more nor less than
      mechanical birds.
    

      Origin of the Aeroplane.
    

      Octave Chanute, of Chicago, may well be called "the developer of the
      flying machine." Leaving balloons and various forms of gas-bags out of
      consideration, other experimenters, notably Langley and Lilienthal,
      antedated him in attempting the navigation of the air on aeroplanes, or
      flying machines, but none of them were wholly successful, and it remained
      for Chanute to demonstrate the practicability of what was then called the
      gliding machine. This term was adopted because the apparatus was, as the
      name implies, simply a gliding machine, being without motor propulsion,
      and intended solely to solve the problem of the best form of construction.
      The biplane, used by Chanute in 1896, is still the basis of most
      successful flying machines, the only radical difference being that motors,
      rudders, etc., have been added.
    

      Character of Chanute's Experiments.
    

      It was the privilege of the author of this book to be Mr. Chanute's guest
      at Millers, Indiana, in 1896, when, in collaboration with Messrs. Herring
      and Avery, he was conducting the series of experiments which have since
      made possible the construction of the modern flying machine which such
      successful aviators as the Wright brothers and others are now using. It
      was a wild country, much frequented by eagles, hawks, and similar birds.
      The enthusiastic trio, Chanute, Herring and Avery, would watch for hours
      the evolutions of some big bird in the air, agreeing in the end on the
      verdict, "When we master the principle of that bird's soaring without wing
      action, we will have come close to solving the problem of the flying
      machine."
    

      Aeroplanes of various forms were constructed by Mr. Chanute with the
      assistance of Messrs. Herring and Avery until, at the time of the writer's
      visit, they had settled upon the biplane, or two-surface machine. Mr.
      Herring later equipped this with a rudder, and made other additions, but
      the general idea is still the basis of the Wright, Curtiss, and other
      machines in which, by the aid of gasolene motors, long flights have been
      made.
    

      Developments by the Wrights.
    

      In 1900 the Wright brothers, William and Orville, who were then in the
      bicycle business in Dayton, Ohio, became interested in Chanute's
      experiments and communicated with him. The result was that the Wrights
      took up Chanute's ideas and developed them further, making many additions
      of their own, one of which was the placing of a rudder in front, and the
      location of the operator horizontally on the machine, thus diminishing by
      four-fifths the wind resistance of the man's body. For three years the
      Wrights experimented with the glider before venturing to add a motor,
      which was not done until they had thoroughly mastered the control of their
      movements in the air.
    

      Limits of the Flying Machine.
    

      In the opinion of competent experts it is idle to look for a commercial
      future for the flying machine. There is, and always will be, a limit to
      its carrying capacity which will prohibit its employment for passenger or
      freight purposes in a wholesale or general way. There are some, of course,
      who will argue that because a machine will carry two people another may be
      constructed that will carry a dozen, but those who make this contention do
      not understand the theory of weight sustentation in the air; or that the
      greater the load the greater must be the lifting power (motors and plane
      surface), and that there is a limit to these—as will be explained
      later on—beyond which the aviator cannot go.
    

      Some Practical Uses.
    

      At the same time there are fields in which the flying machine may be used
      to great advantage. These are:
    

      Sports—Flying machine races or flights will always be popular by
      reason of the element of danger. It is a strange, but nevertheless a true
      proposition, that it is this element which adds zest to all sporting
      events.
    

      Scientific—For exploration of otherwise inaccessible regions such as
      deserts, mountain tops, etc.
    

      Reconnoitering—In time of war flying machines may be used to
      advantage to spy out an enemy's encampment, ascertain its defenses, etc.
    


 








      CHAPTER III. MECHANICAL BIRD ACTION
    

      In order to understand the theory of the modern flying machine one must
      also understand bird action and wind action. In this connection the
      following simple experiment will be of interest:
    

      Take a circular-shaped bit of cardboard, like the lid of a hat box, and
      remove the bent-over portion so as to have a perfectly flat surface with a
      clean, sharp edge. Holding the cardboard at arm's length, withdraw your
      hand, leaving the cardboard without support. What is the result? The
      cardboard, being heavier than air, and having nothing to sustain it, will
      fall to the ground. Pick it up and throw it, with considerable force,
      against the wind edgewise. What happens? Instead of falling to the ground,
      the cardboard sails along on the wind, remaining afloat so long as it is
      in motion. It seeks the ground, by gravity, only as the motion ceases, and
      then by easy stages, instead of dropping abruptly as in the first
      instance.
    

      Here we have a homely, but accurate illustration of the action of the
      flying machine. The motor does for the latter what the force of your arm
      does for the cardboard—imparts a motion which keeps it afloat. The
      only real difference is that the motion given by the motor is continuous
      and much more powerful than that given by your arm. The action of the
      latter is limited and the end of its propulsive force is reached within a
      second or two after it is exerted, while the action of the motor is
      prolonged.
    

      Another Simple Illustration.
    

      Another simple means of illustrating the principle of flying machine
      operation, so far as sustentation and the elevation and depression of the
      planes is concerned, is explained in the accompanying diagram.
    

      A is a piece of cardboard about 2 by 3 inches in size. B is a piece of
      paper of the same size pasted to one edge of A. If you bend the paper to a
      curve, with convex side up and blow across it as shown in Figure C, the
      paper will rise instead of being depressed. The dotted lines show that the
      air is passing over the top of the curved paper and yet, no matter how
      hard you may blow, the effect will be to elevate the paper, despite the
      fact that the air is passing over, instead of under the curved surface.
    

      In Figure D we have an opposite effect. Here the paper is in a curve
      exactly the reverse of that shown in Figure C, bringing the concave side
      up. Now if you will again blow across the surface of the card the action
      of the paper will be downward—it will be impossible to make it rise.
      The harder you blow the greater will be the downward movement.
    

      Principle In General Use.
    

      This principle is taken advantage of in the construction of all successful
      flying machines. Makers of monoplanes and biplanes alike adhere to curved
      bodies, with the concave surface facing downward. Straight planes were
      tried for a time, but found greatly lacking in the power of sustentation.
      By curving the planes, and placing the concave surface downward, a sort of
      inverted bowl is formed in which the air gathers and exerts a buoyant
      effect. Just what the ratio of the curve should be is a matter of
      contention. In some instances one inch to the foot is found to be
      satisfactory; in others this is doubled, and there are a few cases in
      which a curve of as much as 3 inches to the foot has been used.
    

      Right here it might be well to explain that the word "plane" applied to
      flying machines of modern construction is in reality a misnomer. Plane
      indicates a flat, level surface. As most successful flying machines have
      curved supporting surfaces it is clearly wrong to speak of "planes," or
      "aeroplanes." Usage, however, has made the terms convenient and, as they
      are generally accepted and understood by the public, they are used in like
      manner in this volume.
    

      Getting Under Headway.
    

      A bird, on first rising from the ground, or beginning its flight from a
      tree, will flap its wings to get under headway. Here again we have another
      illustration of the manner in which a flying machine gets under headway—the
      motor imparts the force necessary to put the machine into the air, but
      right here the similarity ceases. If the machine is to be kept afloat the
      motor must be kept moving. A flying machine will not sustain itself; it
      will not remain suspended in the air unless it is under headway. This is
      because it is heavier than air, and gravity draws it to the ground.
    

      Puzzle in Bird Soaring.
    

      But a bird, which is also heavier than air, will remain suspended, in a
      calm, will even soar and move in a circle, without apparent movement of
      its wings. This is explained on the theory that there are generally
      vertical columns of air in circulation strong enough to sustain a bird,
      but much too weak to exert any lifting power on a flying machine, It is
      easy to understand how a bird can remain suspended when the wind is in
      action, but its suspension in a seeming dead calm was a puzzle to
      scientists until Mr. Chanute advanced the proposition of vertical columns
      of air.
    

      Modeled Closely After Birds.
    

      So far as possible, builders of flying machines have taken what may be
      called "the architecture" of birds as a model. This is readily noticeable
      in the form of construction. When a bird is in motion its wings (except
      when flapping) are extended in a straight line at right angles to its
      body. This brings a sharp, thin edge against the air, offering the least
      possible surface for resistance, while at the same time a broad surface
      for support is afforded by the flat, under side of the wings. Identically
      the same thing is done in the construction of the flying machine.
    

      Note, for instance, the marked similarity in form as shown in the
      illustration in Chapter II. Here A is the bird, and B the general outline
      of the machine. The thin edge of the plane in the latter is almost a
      duplicate of that formed by the outstretched wings of the bird, while the
      rudder plane in the rear serves the same purpose as the bird's tail.
    


 








      CHAPTER IV. VARIOUS FORMS OF FLYING MACHINES.
    

      There are three distinct and radically different forms of flying machines.
      These are:
    

      Aeroplanes, helicopters and ornithopers.
    

      Of these the aeroplane takes precedence and is used almost exclusively by
      successful aviators, the helicopters and ornithopers having been tried and
      found lacking in some vital features, while at the same time in some
      respects the helicopter has advantages not found in the aeroplane.
    

      What the Helicopter Is.
    

      The helicopter gets its name from being fitted with vertical propellers or
      helices (see illustration) by the action of which the machine is raised
      directly from the ground into the air. This does away with the necessity
      for getting the machine under a gliding headway before it floats, as is
      the case with the aeroplane, and consequently the helicopter can be
      handled in a much smaller space than is required for an aeroplane. This,
      in many instances, is an important advantage, but it is the only one the
      helicopter possesses, and is more than overcome by its drawbacks. The most
      serious of these is that the helicopter is deficient in sustaining
      capacity, and requires too much motive power.
    

      Form of the Ornithopter.
    

      The ornithopter has hinged planes which work like the wings of a bird. At
      first thought this would seem to be the correct principle, and most of the
      early experimenters conducted their operations on this line. It is now
      generally understood, however, that the bird in soaring is in reality an
      aeroplane, its extended wings serving to sustain, as well as propel, the
      body. At any rate the ornithoper has not been successful in aviation, and
      has been interesting mainly as an ingenious toy. Attempts to construct it
      on a scale that would permit of its use by man in actual aerial flights
      have been far from encouraging.
    

      Three Kinds of Aeroplanes.
    

      There are three forms of aeroplanes, with all of which more or less
      success has been attained. These are:
    

      The monoplane, a one-surfaced plane, like that used by Bleriot.
    

      The biplane, a two-surfaced plane, now used by the Wrights, Curtiss,
      Farman, and others.
    

      The triplane, a three-surfaced plane This form is but little used, its
      only prominent advocate at present being Elle Lavimer, a Danish
      experimenter, who has not thus far accomplished much.
    

      Whatever of real success has been accomplished in aviation may be credited
      to the monoplane and biplane, with the balance in favor of the latter. The
      monoplane is the more simple in construction and, where weight-sustaining
      capacity is not a prime requisite, may probably be found the most
      convenient. This opinion is based on the fact that the smaller the surface
      of the plane the less will be the resistance offered to the air, and the
      greater will be the speed at which the machine may be moved. On the other
      hand, the biplane has a much greater plane surface (double that of a
      monoplane of the same size) and consequently much greater weight-carrying
      capacity.
    

      Differences in Biplanes.
    

      While all biplanes are of the same general construction so far as the main
      planes are concerned, each aviator has his own ideas as to the "rigging."
    

      Wright, for instance, places a double horizontal rudder in front, with a
      vertical rudder in the rear. There are no partitions between the main
      planes, and the bicycle wheels used on other forms are replaced by skids.
    

      Voisin, on the contrary, divides the main planes with vertical partitions
      to increase stability in turning; uses a single-plane horizontal rudder in
      front, and a big box-tail with vertical rudder at the rear; also the
      bicycle wheels.
    

      Curtiss attaches horizontal stabilizing surfaces to the upper plane; has a
      double horizontal rudder in front, with a vertical rudder and horizontal
      stabilizing surfaces in rear. Also the bicycle wheel alighting gear.
    


 








      CHAPTER V. CONSTRUCTING A GLIDING MACHINE.
    

      First decide upon the kind of a machine you want—monoplane, biplane,
      or triplane. For a novice the biplane will, as a rule, be found the most
      satisfactory as it is more compact and therefore the more easily handled.
      This will be easily understood when we realize that the surface of a
      flying machine should be laid out in proportion to the amount of weight it
      will have to sustain. The generally accepted rule is that 152 square feet
      of surface will sustain the weight of an average-sized man, say 170
      pounds. Now it follows that if these 152 square feet of surface are used
      in one plane, as in the monoplane, the length and width of this plane must
      be greater than if the same amount of surface is secured by using two
      planes—the biplane. This results in the biplane being more compact
      and therefore more readily manipulated than the monoplane, which is an
      important item for a novice.
    

      Glider the Basis of Success.
    

      Flying machines without motors are called gliders. In making a flying
      machine you first construct the glider. If you use it in this form it
      remains a glider. If you install a motor it becomes a flying machine. You
      must have a good glider as the basis of a successful flying machine.
    

      It will be well for the novice, the man who has never had any experience
      as an aviator, to begin with a glider and master its construction and
      operation before he essays the more pretentious task of handling a
      fully-equipped flying machine. In fact, it is essential that he should do
      so.
    

      Plans for Handy Glider.
    

      A glider with a spread (advancing edge) of 20 feet, and a breadth or depth
      of 4 feet, will be about right to begin with. Two planes of this size will
      give the 152 square yards of surface necessary to sustain a man's weight.
      Remember that in referring to flying machine measurements "spread" takes
      the place of what would ordinarily be called "length," and invariably
      applies to the long or advancing edge of the machine which cuts into the
      air. Thus, a glider is spoken of as being 20 feet spread, and 4 feet in
      depth. So far as mastering the control of the machine is concerned,
      learning to balance one's self in the air, guiding the machine in any
      desired direction by changing the position of the body, etc., all this may
      be learned just as readily, and perhaps more so, with a 20-foot glider
      than with a larger apparatus.
    

      Kind of Material Required.
    

      There are three all-important features in flying machine construction,
      viz.: lightness, strength and extreme rigidity. Spruce is the wood
      generally used for glider frames. Oak, ash and hickory are all stronger,
      but they are also considerably heavier, and where the saving of weight is
      essential, the difference is largely in favor of spruce. This will be seen
      in the following table:
    

                   Weight       Tensile          Compressive
                per cubic ft.   Strength           Strength
      Wood         in lbs.    lbs. per sq. in.   lbs. per sq in.
   Hickory           53           12,000          8,500
   Oak               50           12,000          9,000
   Ash               38           12,000          6,000
   Walnut            38            8,000          6,000
   Spruce            25            8,000          5,000
   Pine              25            5,000          4,500


      Considering the marked saving in weight spruce has a greater percentage of
      tensile strength than any of the other woods. It is also easier to find in
      long, straight-grained pieces free from knots, and it is this kind only
      that should be used in flying machine construction.
    

      You will next need some spools or hanks of No. 6 linen shoe thread, metal
      sockets, a supply of strong piano wire, a quantity of closely-woven silk
      or cotton cloth, glue, turnbuckles, varnish, etc.
    

      Names of the Various Parts.
    

      The long strips, four in number, which form the front and rear edges of
      the upper and lower frames, are called the horizontal beams. These are
      each 20 feet in length. These horizontal beams are connected by upright
      strips, 4 feet long, called stanchions. There are usually 12 of these, six
      on the front edge, and six on the rear. They serve to hold the upper plane
      away from the lower one. Next comes the ribs. These are 4 feet in length
      (projecting for a foot over the rear beam), and while intended principally
      as a support to the cloth covering of the planes, also tend to hold the
      frame together in a horizontal position just as the stanchions do in the
      vertical. There are forty-one of these ribs, twenty-one on the upper and
      twenty on the lower plane. Then come the struts, the main pieces which
      join the horizontal beams. All of these parts are shown in the
      illustrations, reference to which will make the meaning of the various
      names clear.
    

      Quantity and Cost of Material.
    

      For the horizontal beams four pieces of spruce, 20 feet long, 1 1/2 inches
      wide and 3/4 inch thick are necessary. These pieces must be
      straight-grain, and absolutely free from knots. If it is impossible to
      obtain clear pieces of this length, shorter ones may be spliced, but this
      is not advised as it adds materially to the weight. The twelve stanchions
      should be 4 feet long and 7/8 inch in diameter and rounded in form so as
      to offer as little resistance as possible to the wind. The struts, there
      are twelve of them, are 3 feet long by 11/4 x 1/2 inch. For a 20-foot
      biplane about 20 yards of stout silk or unbleached muslin, of standard one
      yard width, will be needed. The forty-one ribs are each 4 feet long, and
      1/2 inch square. A roll of No. 12 piano wire, twenty-four sockets, a
      package of small copper tacks, a pot of glue, and similar accessories will
      be required. The entire cost of this material should not exceed $20. The
      wood and cloth will be the two largest items, and these should not cost
      more than $10. This leaves $10 for the varnish, wire, tacks, glue, and
      other incidentals. This estimate is made for cost of materials only, it
      being taken for granted that the experimenter will construct his own
      glider. Should the services of a carpenter be required the total cost will
      probably approximate $60 or $70.
    

      Application of the Rudders.
    

      The figures given also include the expense of rudders, but the details of
      these have not been included as the glider is really complete without
      them. Some of the best flights the writer ever saw were made by Mr. A. M.
      Herring in a glider without a rudder, and yet there can be no doubt that a
      rudder, properly proportioned and placed, especially a rear rudder, is of
      great value to the aviator as it keeps the machine with its head to the
      wind, which is the only safe position for a novice. For initial
      educational purposes, however, a rudder is not essential as the glides
      will, or should, be made on level ground, in moderate, steady wind
      currents, and at a modest elevation. The addition of a rudder, therefore,
      may well be left until the aviator has become reasonably expert in the
      management of his machine.
    

      Putting the Machine Together.
    

      Having obtained the necessary material, the first move is to have the rib
      pieces steamed and curved. This curve may be slight, about 2 inches for
      the 4 feet. While this is being done the other parts should be carefully
      rounded so the square edges will be taken off. This may be done with sand
      paper. Next apply a coat of shellac, and when dry rub it down thoroughly
      with fine sand paper. When the ribs are curved treat them in the same way.
    

      Lay two of the long horizontal frame pieces on the floor 3 feet apart.
      Between these place six of the strut pieces. Put one at each end, and each
      4 1/2 feet put another, leaving a 2-foot space in the center. This will
      give you four struts 4 1/2 feet apart, and two in the center 2 feet apart,
      as shown in the illustration. This makes five rectangles. Be sure that the
      points of contact are perfect, and that the struts are exactly at right
      angles with the horizontal frames. This is a most important feature
      because if your frame "skews" or twists you cannot keep it straight in the
      air. Now glue the ends of the struts to the frame pieces, using plenty of
      glue, and nail on strips that will hold the frame in place while the glue
      is drying. The next day lash the joints together firmly with the shoe
      thread, winding it as you would to mend a broken gun stock, and over each
      layer put a coating of glue. This done, the other frame pieces and struts
      may be treated in the same way, and you will thus get the foundations for
      the two planes.
    

      Another Way of Placing Struts.
    

      In the machines built for professional use a stronger and more certain
      form of construction is desired. This is secured by the placing the struts
      for the lower plane under the frame piece, and those for the upper plane
      over it, allowing them in each instance to come out flush with the outer
      edges of the frame pieces. They are then securely fastened with a tie
      plate or clamp which passes over the end of the strut and is bound firmly
      against the surface of the frame piece by the eye bolts of the stanchion
      sockets.
    

      Placing the Rib Pieces.
    

      Take one of the frames and place on it the ribs, with the arched side up,
      letting one end of the ribs come flush with the front edge of the forward
      frame, and the other end projecting about a foot beyond the rear frame.
      The manner of fastening the ribs to the frame pieces is optional. In some
      cases they are lashed with shoe thread, and in others clamped with a metal
      clamp fastened with 1/2-inch wood screws. Where clamps and screws are used
      care should be taken to make slight holes in the wood with an awl before
      starting the screws so as to lessen any tendency to split the wood. On the
      top frame, twenty-one ribs placed one foot apart will be required. On the
      lower frame, because of the opening left for the operator's body, you will
      need only twenty.
    

      Joining the Two Frames.
    

      The two frames must now be joined together. For this you will need
      twenty-four aluminum or iron sockets which may be purchased at a foundry
      or hardware shop. These sockets, as the name implies, provide a receptacle
      in which the end of a stanchion is firmly held, and have flanges with
      holes for eye-bolts which hold them firmly to the frame pieces, and also
      serve to hold the guy wires. In addition to these eye-bolt holes there are
      two others through which screws are fastened into the frame pieces. On the
      front frame piece of the bottom plane place six sockets, beginning at the
      end of the frame, and locating them exactly opposite the struts. Screw the
      sockets into position with wood screws, and then put the eye-bolts in
      place. Repeat the operation on the rear frame. Next put the sockets for
      the upper plane frame in place.
    

      You are now ready to bring the two planes together. Begin by inserting the
      stanchions in the sockets in the lower plane. The ends may need a little
      rubbing with sandpaper to get them into the sockets, but care must be
      taken to have them fit snugly. When all the stanchions are in place on the
      lower plane, lift the upper plane into position, and fit the sockets over
      the upper ends of the stanchions.
    

      Trussing with Guy Wires.
    

      The next move is to "tie" the frame together rigidly by the aid of guy
      wires. This is where the No. 12 piano wire comes in. Each rectangle formed
      by the struts and stanchions with the exception of the small center one,
      is to be wired separately as shown in the illustration. At each of the
      eight corners forming the rectangle the ring of one of the eye-bolts will
      be found. There are two ways of doing this "tieing," or trussing. One is
      to run the wires diagonally from eye-bolt to eye-bolt, depending upon main
      strength to pull them taut enough, and then twist the ends so as to hold.
      The other is to first make a loop of wire at each eye-bolt, and connect
      these loops to the main wires with turn-buckles. This latter method is the
      best, as it admits of the tension being regulated by simply turning the
      buckle so as to draw the ends of the wire closer together. A glance at the
      illustration will make this plain, and also show how the wires are to be
      placed. The proper degree of tension may be determined in the following
      manner:
    

      After the frame is wired place each end on a saw-horse so as to lift the
      entire frame clear of the work-shop floor. Get under it, in the center
      rectangle and, grasping the center struts, one in each hand, put your
      entire weight on the structure. If it is properly put together it will
      remain rigid and unyielding. Should it sag ever so slightly the tension of
      the wires must be increased until any tendency to sag, no matter how
      slight it may be, is overcome.
    

      Putting on the Cloth.
    

      We are now ready to put on the cloth covering which holds the air and
      makes the machine buoyant. The kind of material employed is of small
      account so long as it is light, strong, and wind-proof, or nearly so. Some
      aviators use what is called rubberized silk, others prefer balloon cloth.
      Ordinary muslin of good quality, treated with a coat of light varnish
      after it is in place, will answer all the purposes of the amateur.
    

      Cut the cloth into strips a little over 4 feet in length. As you have 20
      feet in width to cover, and the cloth is one yard wide, you will need
      seven strips for each plane, so as to allow for laps, etc. This will give
      you fourteen strips. Glue the end of each strip around the front
      horizontal beams of the planes, and draw each strip back, over the ribs,
      tacking the edges to the ribs as you go along, with small copper or brass
      tacks. In doing this keep the cloth smooth and stretched tight. Tacks
      should also be used in addition to the glue, to hold the cloth to the
      horizontal beams.
    

      Next, give the cloth a coat of varnish on the clear, or upper side, and
      when this is dry your glider will be ready for use.
    

      Reinforcing the Cloth.
    

      While not absolutely necessary for amateur purposes, reinforcement of the
      cloth, so as to avoid any tendency to split or tear out from
      wind-pressure, is desirable. One way of doing this is to tack narrow
      strips of some heavier material, like felt, over the cloth where it laps
      on the ribs. Another is to sew slips or pockets in the cloth itself and
      let the ribs run through them. Still another method is to sew 2-inch
      strips (of the same material as the cover) on the cloth, placing them
      about one yard apart, but having them come in the center of each piece of
      covering, and not on the laps where the various pieces are joined.
    

      Use of Armpieces.
    

      Should armpieces be desired, aside from those afforded by the center
      struts, take two pieces of spruce, 3 feet long, by 1 x 1 3/4 inches, and
      bolt them to the front and rear beams of the lower plane about 14 inches
      apart. These will be more comfortable than using the struts, as the
      operator will not have to spread his arms so much. In using the struts the
      operator, as a rule, takes hold of them with his hands, while with the
      armpieces, as the name implies, he places his arms over them, one of the
      strips coming under each armpit.
    

      Frequently somebody asks why the ribs should be curved. The answer is
      easy. The curvature tends to direct the air downward toward the rear and,
      as the air is thus forced downward, there is more or less of an impact
      which assists in propelling the aeroplane upwards.
    


 








      CHAPTER VI. LEARNING TO FLY.
    

      Don't be too ambitious at the start. Go slow, and avoid unnecessary risks.
      At its best there is an element of danger in aviation which cannot be
      entirely eliminated, but it may be greatly reduced and minimized by the
      use of common sense.
    

      Theoretically, the proper way to begin a glide is from the top of an
      incline, facing against the wind, so that the machine will soar until the
      attraction of gravitation draws it gradually to the ground. This is the
      manner in which experienced aviators operate, but it must be kept in mind
      that these men are experts. They understand air currents, know how to
      control the action and direction of their machines by shifting the
      position of their bodies, and by so doing avoid accidents which would be
      unavoidable by a novice.
    

      Begin on Level Ground.
    

      Make your first flights on level ground, having a couple of men to assist
      you in getting the apparatus under headway. Take your position in the
      center rectangle, back far enough to give the forward edges of the glider
      an inclination to tilt upward very slightly. Now start and run forward at
      a moderately rapid gait, one man at each end of the glider assisting you.
      As the glider cuts into the air the wind will catch under the uplifted
      edges of the curved planes, and buoy it up so that it will rise in the air
      and take you with it. This rise will not be great, just enough to keep you
      well clear of the ground. Now project your legs a little to the front so
      as to shift the center of gravity a trifle and bring the edges of the
      glider on an exact level with the atmosphere. This, with the momentum
      acquired in the start, will keep the machine moving forward for some
      distance.
    

      Effect of Body Movements.
    

      When the weight of the body is slightly back of the center of gravity the
      edges of the advancing planes are tilted slightly upward. The glider in
      this position acts as a scoop, taking in the air which, in turn, lifts it
      off the ground. When a certain altitude is reached—this varies with
      the force of the wind—the tendency to a forward movement is lost and
      the glider comes to the ground. It is to prolong the forward movement as
      much as possible that the operator shifts the center of gravity slightly,
      bringing the apparatus on an even keel as it were by lowering the
      advancing edges. This done, so long as there is momentum enough to keep
      the glider moving, it will remain afloat.
    

      If you shift your body well forward it will bring the front edges of the
      glider down, and elevate the rear ones. In this way the air will be
      "spilled" out at the rear, and, having lost the air support or buoyancy,
      the glider comes down to the ground. A few flights will make any ordinary
      man proficient in the control of his apparatus by his body movements, not
      only as concerns the elevating and depressing of the advancing edges, but
      also actual steering. You will quickly learn, for instance, that, as the
      shifting of the bodily weight backwards and forwards affects the upward
      and downward trend of the planes, so a movement sideways—to the left
      or the right—affects the direction in which the glider travels.
    

      Ascends at an Angle.
    

      In ascending, the glider and flying machine, like the bird, makes an
      angular, not a vertical flight. Just what this angle of ascension may be
      is difficult to determine. It is probable and in fact altogether likely,
      that it varies with the force of the wind, weight of the rising body,
      power of propulsion, etc. This, in the language of physicists, is the
      angle of inclination, and, as a general thing, under normal conditions
      (still air) should be put down as about one in ten, or 5 3/4 degrees. This
      would be an ideal condition, but it has not, as vet been reached. The
      force of the wind affects the angle considerably, as does also the weight
      and velocity of the apparatus. In general practice the angle varies from
      23 to 45 degrees. At more than 45 degrees the supporting effort is
      overcome by the resistance to forward motion.
    

      Increasing the speed or propulsive force, tends to lessen the angle at
      which the machine may be successfully operated because it reduces the wind
      pressure. Most of the modern flying machines are operated at an angle of
      23 degrees, or less.
    

      Maintaining an Equilibrium.
    

      Stable equilibrium is one of the main essentials to successful flight, and
      this cannot be preserved in an uncertain, gusty wind, especially by an
      amateur. The novice should not attempt a glide unless the conditions are
      just right. These conditions are: A clear, level space, without
      obstructions, such as trees, etc., and a steady wind of not exceeding
      twelve miles an hour. Always fly against the wind.
    

      When a reasonable amount of proficiency in the handling of the machine on
      level ground has been acquired the field of practice may be changed to
      some gentle slope. In starting from a slope it will be found easier to
      keep the machine afloat, but the experience at first is likely to be very
      disconcerting to a man of less than iron nerve. As the glider sails away
      from the top of the slope the distance between him and the ground
      increases rapidly until the aviator thinks he is up a hundred miles in the
      air. If he will keep cool, manipulate his apparatus so as to preserve its
      equilibrium, and "let nature take its course," he will come down gradually
      and safely to the ground at a considerable distance from the starting
      place. This is one advantage of starting from an elevation—your
      machine will go further.
    

      But, if the aviator becomes "rattled"; if he loses control of his machine,
      serious results, including a bad fall with risk of death, are almost
      certain. And yet this practice is just as necessary as the initial lessons
      on level ground. When judgment is used, and "haste made slowly," there is
      very little real danger. While experimenting with gliders the Wrights made
      flights innumerable under all sorts of conditions and never had an
      accident of any kind.
    

      Effects of Wind Currents.
    

      The larger the machine the more difficult it will be to control its
      movements in the air, and yet enlargement is absolutely necessary as
      weight, in the form of motor, rudder, etc., is added.
    

      Air currents near the surface of the ground are diverted by every
      obstruction unless the wind is blowing hard enough to remove the
      obstruction entirely. Take, for instance, the case of a tree or shrub, in
      a moderate wind of from ten to twelve miles an hour. As the wind strikes
      the tree it divides, part going to one side and part going to the other,
      while still another part is directed upward and goes over the top of the
      obstruction. This makes the handling of a glider on an obstructed field
      difficult and uncertain. To handle a glider successfully the place of
      operation should be clear and the wind moderate and steady. If it is gusty
      postpone your flight. In this connection it will be well to understand the
      velocity of the wind, and what it means as shown in the following table:
    

     Miles per hour Feet per second     Pressure per sq. foot
          10                14.7                .492
          25                36.7                3.075
          50                73.3               12.300
          100              146.6               49.200


      Pressure of wind increases in proportion to the square of the velocity.
      Thus wind at 10 miles an hour has four times the pressure of wind at 5
      miles an hour. The greater this pressure the large and heavier the object
      which can be raised. Any boy who has had experience in flying kites can
      testify to this, High winds, however, are almost invariably gusty and
      uncertain as to direction, and this makes them dangerous for aviators. It
      is also a self-evident fact that, beyond a certain stage, the harder the
      wind blows the more difficult it is to make headway against it.
    

      Launching Device for Gliders.
    

      On page 195 will be found a diagram of the various parts of a launcher for
      gliders, designed and patented by Mr. Octave Chanute. In describing this
      invention in Aeronautics, Mr. Chanute says:
    

      "In practicing, the track, preferably portable, is generally laid in the
      direction of the existing wind and the car, preferably a light
      platform-car, is placed on the track. The truck carrying the winding-drum
      and its motor is placed to windward a suitable distance—say from two
      hundred to one thousand feet—and is firmly blocked or anchored in
      line with the portable track, which is preferably 80 or 100 feet in
      length. The flying or gliding machine to be launched with its operator is
      placed on the platform-car at the leeward end of the portable track. The
      line, which is preferably a flexible combination wire-and-cord cable, is
      stretched between the winding-drum on the track and detachably secured to
      the flying or gliding machine, preferably by means of a trip-hoop, or else
      held in the hand of the operator, so that the operator may readily detach
      the same from the flying-machine when the desired height is attained."
    

      How Glider Is Started.
    

      "Then upon a signal given by the operator the engineer at the motor puts
      it into operation, gradually increasing the speed until the line is wound
      upon the drum at a maximum speed of, say, thirty miles an hour. The
      operator of the flying-machine, whether he stands upright and carries it
      on his shoulders, or whether he sits or lies down prone upon it, adjusts
      the aeroplane or carrying surfaces so that the wind shall strike them on
      the top and press downward instead of upward until the platform-car under
      action of the winding-drum and line attains the required speed.
    

      "When the operator judges that his speed is sufficient, and this depends
      upon the velocity of the wind as well as that of the car moving against
      the wind, he quickly causes the front of the flying-machine to tip upward,
      so that the relative wind striking on the under side of the planes or
      carrying surfaces shall lift the flying machine into the air. It then
      ascends like a kite to such height as may be desired by the operator, who
      then trips the hook and releases the line from the machine."
    

      What the Operator Does.
    

      "The operator being now free in the air has a certain initial velocity
      imparted by the winding-drum and line and also a potential energy
      corresponding to his height above the ground. If the flying or gliding
      machine is provided with a motor, he can utilize that in his further
      flight, and if it is a simple gliding machine without motor he can make a
      descending flight through the air to such distance as corresponds to the
      velocity acquired and the height gained, steering meanwhile by the devices
      provided for that purpose.
    

      "The simplest operation or maneuver is to continue the flight straight
      ahead against the wind; but it is possible to vary this course to the
      right or left, or even to return in downward flight with the wind to the
      vicinity of the starting-point. Upon nearing the ground the operator tips
      upward his carrying-surfaces and stops his headway upon the cushion of
      increased air resistance so caused. The operator is in no way permanently
      fastened to his machine, and the machine and the operator simply rest upon
      the light platform-car, so that the operator is free to rise with the
      machine from the car whenever the required initial velocity is attained.
    

      Motor For the Launcher.
    

      "The motor may be of any suitable kind or construction, but is preferably
      an electric or gasolene motor. The winding-drum is furnished with any
      suitable or customary reversing-guide to cause the line to wind smoothly
      and evenly upon the drum. The line is preferably a cable composed of
      flexible wire and having a cotton or other cord core to increase its
      flexibility. The line extends from the drum to the flying or gliding
      machine. Its free end may, if desired, be grasped and held by the operator
      until the flying-machine ascends to the desired height, when by simply
      letting go of the line the operator may continue his flight free. The
      line, however, is preferably connected to the flying or gliding machine
      directly by a trip-hook having a handle or trip lever within reach of the
      operator, so that when he ascends to the required height he may readily
      detach the line from the flying or gliding machine."
    


 








      CHAPTER VII. PUTTING ON THE RUDDER.
    

      Gliders as a rule have only one rudder, and this is in the rear. It tends
      to keep the apparatus with its head to the wind. Unlike the rudder on a
      boat it is fixed and immovable. The real motor-propelled flying machine,
      generally has both front and rear rudders manipulated by wire cables at
      the will of the operator.
    

      Allowing that the amateur has become reasonably expert in the manipulation
      of the glider he should, before constructing an actual flying machine,
      equip his glider with a rudder.
    

      Cross Pieces for Rudder Beam.
    

      To do this he should begin by putting in a cross piece, 2 feet long by 1/4
      x 3/4 inches between the center struts, in the lower plane. This may be
      fastened to the struts with bolts or braces. The former method is
      preferable. On this cross piece, and on the rear frame of the plane
      itself, the rudder beam is clamped and bolted. This rudder beam is 8 feet
      11 inches long. Having put these in place duplicate them in exactly the
      same manner and dimensions from the upper frame The cross pieces on which
      the ends of the rudder beams are clamped should be placed about one foot
      in advance of the rear frame beam.
    

      The Rudder Itself.
    

      The next step is to construct the rudder itself. This consists of two
      sections, one horizontal, the other vertical. The latter keeps the
      aeroplane headed into the wind, while the former keeps it steady—preserves
      the equilibrium.
    

      The rudder beams form the top and bottom frames of the vertical rudder. To
      these are bolted and clamped two upright pieces, 3 feet, 10 inches in
      length, and 3/4 inch in cross section. These latter pieces are placed
      about two feet apart. This completes the framework of the vertical rudder.
      See next page (59).
    

      For the horizontal rudder you will require two strips 6 feet long, and
      four 2 feet long. Find the exact center of the upright pieces on the
      vertical rudder, and at this spot fasten with bolts the long pieces of the
      horizontal, placing them on the outside of the vertical strips. Next join
      the ends of the horizontal strips with the 2-foot pieces, using small
      screws and corner braces. This done you will have two of the 2-foot pieces
      left. These go in the center of the horizontal frame, "straddling" the
      vertical strips, as shown in the illustration.
    

      The framework is to be covered with cloth in the same manner as the
      planes. For this about ten yards will be needed.
    

      Strengthening the Rudder.
    

      To ensure rigidity the rudder must be stayed with guy wires. For this
      purpose the No. 12 piano wire is the best. Begin by running two of these
      wires from the top eye-bolts of stanchions 3 and 4, page 37, to rudder
      beam where it joins the rudder planes, fastening them at the bottom. Then
      run two wires from the top of the rudder beam at the same point, to the
      bottom eye-bolts of the same stanchions. This will give you four diagonal
      wires reaching from the rudder beam to the top and bottom planes of the
      glider. Now, from the outer ends of the rudder frame run four similar
      diagonal wires to the end of the rudder beam where it rests on the cross
      piece. You will then have eight truss wires strengthening the connection
      of the rudder to the main body of the glider.
    

      The framework of the rudder planes is then to be braced in the same way,
      which will take eight more wires, four for each rudder plane. All the
      wires are to be connected at one end with turn-buckles so the tension may
      be regulated as desired.
    

      In forming the rudder frame it will be well to mortise the corners, tack
      them together with small nails, and then put in a corner brace in the
      inside of each joint. In doing this bear in mind that the material to be
      thus fastened is light, and consequently the lightest of nails, screws,
      bolts and corner pieces, etc., is necessary.
    


 








      CHAPTER VIII. THE REAL FLYING MACHINE.
    

      We will now assume that you have become proficient enough to warrant an
      attempt at the construction of a real flying machine—one that will
      not only remain suspended in the air at the will of the operator, but make
      respectable progress in whatever direction he may desire to go. The
      glider, it must be remembered, is not steerable, except to a limited
      extent, and moves only in one direction—against the wind. Besides
      this its power of flotation—suspension in the air—is
      circumscribed.
    

      Larger Surface Area Required.
    

      The real flying machine is the glider enlarged, and equipped with motor
      and propeller. The first thing to do is to decide upon the size required.
      While a glider of 20 foot spread is large enough to sustain a man it could
      not under any possible conditions, be made to rise with the weight of the
      motor, propeller and similar equipment added. As the load is increased so
      must the surface area of the planes be increased. Just what this increase
      in surface area should be is problematical as experienced aviators
      disagree, but as a general proposition it may be placed at from three to
      four times the area of a 20-foot glider. 3


      Some Practical Examples.
    

      The Wrights used a biplane 41 feet in spread, and 6 1/2 ft. deep. This,
      for the two planes, gives a total surface area of 538 square feet,
      inclusive of auxiliary planes. This sustains the engine equipment,
      operator, etc., a total weight officially announced at 1,070 pounds. It
      shows a lifting capacity of about two pounds to the square foot of plane
      surface, as against a lifting capacity of about 1/2 pound per square foot
      of plane surface for the 20-foot glider. This same Wright machine is also
      reported to have made a successful flight, carrying a total load of 1,100
      pounds, which would be over two pounds for each square foot of surface
      area, which, with auxiliary planes, is 538 square feet.
    

      To attain the same results in a monoplane, the single surface would have
      to be 60 feet in spread and 9 feet deep. But, while this is the
      mathematical rule, Bleriot has demonstrated that it does not always hold
      good. On his record-breaking trip across the English channel, July 25th,
      1909, the Frenchman was carried in a monoplane 24 1/2 feet in spread, and
      with a total sustaining surface of 150 1/2 square feet. The total weight
      of the outfit, including machine, operator and fuel sufficient for a
      three-hour run, was only 660 pounds. With an engine of (nominally) 25
      horsepower the distance of 21 miles was covered in 37 minutes.
    

      Which is the Best?
    

      Right here an established mathematical quantity is involved. A small plane
      surface offers less resistance to the air than a large one and
      consequently can attain a higher rate of speed. As explained further on in
      this chapter speed is an important factor in the matter of
      weight-sustaining capacity. A machine that travels one-third faster than
      another can get along with one-half the surface area of the latter without
      affecting the load. See the closing paragraph of this chapter on this
      point. In theory the construction is also the simplest, but this is not
      always found to be so in practice. The designing and carrying into
      execution of plans for an extensive area like that of a monoplane involves
      great skill and cleverness in getting a framework that will be strong
      enough to furnish the requisite support without an undue excess of weight.
      This proposition is greatly simplified in the biplane and, while the speed
      attained by the latter may not be quite so great as that of the monoplane,
      it has much larger weight-carrying capacity.
    

      Proper Sizes For Frame.
    

      Allowing that the biplane form is selected the construction may be
      practically identical with that of the 20-foot glider described in Chapter
      V., except as to size and elimination of the armpieces. In size the
      surface planes should be about twice as large as those of the 20-foot
      glider, viz: 40 feet spread instead of 20, and 6 feet deep instead of 3.
      The horizontal beams, struts, stanchions, ribs, etc., should also be
      increased in size proportionately.
    

      While care in the selection of clear, straight-grained timber is important
      in the glider, it is still more important in the construction of a
      motor-equipped flying machine as the strain on the various parts will be
      much greater.
    

      How to Splice Timbers.
    

      It is practically certain that you will have to resort to splicing the
      horizontal beams as it will be difficult, if not impossible, to find
      40-foot pieces of timber totally free from knots and worm holes, and of
      straight grain.
    

      If splicing is necessary select two good 20-foot pieces, 3 inches wide and
      1 1/2 inches thick, and one 10-foot long, of the same thickness and width.
      Plane off the bottom sides of the 10-foot strip, beginning about two feet
      back from each end, and taper them so the strip will be about 3/4 inch
      thick at the extreme ends. Lay the two 20-foot beams end to end, and under
      the joint thus made place the 10-foot strip, with the planed-off ends
      downward. The joint of the 20-foot pieces should be directly in the center
      of the 10-foot piece. Bore ten holes (with a 1/4-inch augur) equi-distant
      apart through the 20-foot strips and the 10-foot strip under them. Through
      these holes run 1/4-inch stove bolts with round, beveled heads. In placing
      these bolts use washers top and bottom, one between the head and the top
      beam, and the other between the bottom beam and the screw nut which holds
      the bolt. Screw the nuts down hard so as to bring the two beams tightly
      together, and you will have a rigid 40-foot beam.
    

      Splicing with Metal Sleeves.
    

      An even better way of making a splice is by tonguing and grooving the ends
      of the frame pieces and enclosing them in a metal sleeve, but it requires
      more mechanical skill than the method first named. The operation of
      tonguing and grooving is especially delicate and calls for extreme nicety
      of touch in the handling of tools, but if this dexterity is possessed the
      job will be much more satisfactory than one done with a third timber.
    

      As the frame pieces are generally about 1 1/2 inch in diameter, the tongue
      and the groove into which the tongue fits must be correspondingly small.
      Begin by sawing into one side of one of the frame pieces about 4 inches
      back from the end. Make the cut about 1/2 inch deep. Then turn the piece
      over and duplicate the cut. Next saw down from the end to these cuts. When
      the sawed-out parts are removed you will have a "tongue" in the end of the
      frame timber 4 inches long and 1/2 inch thick. The next move is to saw out
      a 5/8-inch groove in the end of the frame piece which is to be joined. You
      will have to use a small chisel to remove the 5/8-inch bit. This will
      leave a groove into which the tongue will fit easily.
    

      Joining the Two Pieces.
    

      Take a thin metal sleeve—this is merely a hollow tube of aluminum or
      brass open at each end—8 inches long, and slip it over either the
      tongued or grooved end of one of the frame timbers. It is well to have the
      sleeve fit snugly, and this may necessitate a sand-papering of the frame
      pieces so the sleeve will slip on.
    

      Push the sleeve well back out of the way. Cover the tongue thoroughly with
      glue, and also put some on the inside of the groove. Use plenty of glue.
      Now press the tongue into the groove, and keep the ends firmly together
      until the glue is thoroughly dried. Rub off the joint lightly with
      sand-paper to remove any of the glue which may have oozed out, and slip
      the sleeve into place over the joint. Tack the sleeve in position with
      small copper tacks, and you will have an ideal splice.
    

      The same operation is to be repeated on each of the four frame pieces. Two
      20-foot pieces joined in this way will give a substantial frame, but when
      suitable timber of this kind can not be had, three pieces, each 6 feet 11
      inches long, may be used. This would give 20 feet 9 inches, of which 8
      inches will be taken up in the two joints, leaving the frame 20 feet 1
      inch long.
    

      Installation of Motor.
    

      Next comes the installation of the motor. The kinds and efficiency of the
      various types are described in the following chapter (IX). All we are
      interested in at this point is the manner of installation. This varies
      according to the personal ideas of the aviator. Thus one man puts his
      motor in the front of his machine, another places it in the center, and
      still another finds the rear of the frame the best. All get good results,
      the comparative advantages of which it is difficult to estimate. Where one
      man, as already explained, flies faster than another, the one beaten from
      the speed standpoint has an advantage in the matter of carrying weight,
      etc.
    

      The ideas of various well-known aviators as to the correct placing of
      motors may be had from the following:
    

      Wrights—In rear of machine and to one side.
    

      Curtiss—Well to rear, about midway between upper and lower planes.
    

      Raich—In rear, above the center.
    

      Brauner-Smith—In exact center of machine.
    

      Van Anden—In center.
    

      Herring-Burgess—Directly behind operator.
    

      Voisin—In rear, and on lower plane.
    

      Bleriot—In front.
    

      R. E. P.—In front.
    

      The One Chief Object.
    

      An even distribution of the load so as to assist in maintaining the
      equilibrium of the machine, should be the one chief object in deciding
      upon the location of the motor. It matters little what particular spot is
      selected so long as the weight does not tend to overbalance the machine,
      or to "throw it off an even keel." It is just like loading a vessel, an
      operation in which the expert seeks to so distribute the weight of the
      cargo as to keep the vessel in a perfectly upright position, and prevent a
      "list" or leaning to one side. The more evenly the cargo is distributed
      the more perfect will be the equilibrium of the vessel and the better it
      can be handled. Sometimes, when not properly stowed, the cargo shifts, and
      this at once affects the position of the craft. When a ship "lists" to
      starboard or port a preponderating weight of the cargo has shifted
      sideways; if bow or stern is unduly depressed it is a sure indication that
      the cargo has shifted accordingly. In either event the handling of the
      craft becomes not only difficult, but extremely hazardous. Exactly the
      same conditions prevail in the handling of a flying machine.
    

      Shape of Machine a Factor.
    

      In placing the motor you must be governed largely by the shape and
      construction of the flying machine frame. If the bulk of the weight of the
      machine and auxiliaries is toward the rear, then the natural location for
      the motor will be well to the front so as to counterbalance the excess in
      rear weight. In the same way if the preponderance of the weight is
      forward, then the motor should be placed back of the center.
    

      As the propeller blade is really an integral part of the motor, the latter
      being useless without it, its placing naturally depends upon the location
      selected for the motor.
    

      Rudders and Auxiliary Planes.
    

      Here again there is great diversity of opinion among aviators as to size,
      location and form. The striking difference of ideas in this respect is
      well illustrated in the choice made by prominent makers as follows:
    

      Voisin—horizontal rudder, with two wing-like planes, in front;
      box-like longitudinal stability plane in rear, inside of which is a
      vertical rudder.
    

      Wright—large biplane horizontal rudder in front at considerable
      distance—about 10 feet—from the main planes; vertical biplane
      rudder in rear; ends of upper and lower main planes made flexible so they
      may be moved.
    

      Curtiss—horizontal biplane rudder, with vertical damping plane
      between the rudder planes about 10 feet in front of main planes; vertical
      rudder in rear; stabilizing planes at each end of upper main plane.
    

      Bleriot—V-shaped stabilizing fin, projecting from rear of plane,
      with broad end outward; to the broad end of this fin is hinged a vertical
      rudder; horizontal biplane rudder, also in rear, under the fin.
    

      These instances show forcefully the wide diversity of opinion existing
      among experienced aviators as to the best manner of placing the rudders
      and stabilizing, or auxiliary planes, and make manifest how hopeless would
      be the task of attempting to select any one form and advise its exclusive
      use.
    

      Rudder and Auxiliary Construction.
    

      The material used in the construction of the rudders and auxiliary planes
      is the same as that used in the main planes—spruce for the framework
      and some kind of rubberized or varnished cloth for the covering. The
      frames are joined and wired in exactly the same manner as the frames of
      the main planes, the purpose being to secure the same strength and
      rigidity. Dimensions of the various parts depend upon the plan adopted and
      the size of the main plane.
    

      No details as to exact dimensions of these rudders and auxiliary planes
      are obtainable. The various builders, while willing enough to supply data
      as to the general measurements, weight, power, etc., of their machines,
      appear to have overlooked the details of the auxiliary parts, thinking,
      perhaps, that these were of no particular import to the general public. In
      the Wright machine, the rear horizontal and front vertical rudders may be
      set down as being about one-quarter (probably a little less) the size of
      the main supporting planes.
    

      Arrangement of Alighting Gear.
    

      Most modern machines are equipped with an alighting gear, which not only
      serves to protect the machine and aviator from shock or injury in touching
      the ground, but also aids in getting under headway. All the leading makes,
      with the exception of the Wright, are furnished with a frame carrying from
      two to five pneumatic rubber-tired bicycle wheels. In the Curtiss and
      Voisin machines one wheel is placed in front and two in the rear. In the
      Bleriot and other prominent machines the reverse is the rule—two
      wheels in front and one in the rear. Farman makes use of five wheels, one
      in the extreme rear, and four, arranged in pairs, a little to the front of
      the center of the main lower plane.
    

      In place of wheels the Wright machine is equipped with a skid-like device
      consisting of two long beams attached to the lower plane by stanchions and
      curving up far in front, so as to act as supports to the horizontal
      rudder.
    

      Why Wood Is Favored.
    

      A frequently asked question is: "Why is not aluminum, or some similar
      metal, substituted for wood." Wood, particularly spruce, is preferred
      because, weight considered, it is much stronger than aluminum, and this is
      the lightest of all metals. In this connection the following table will be
      of interest:
    

                                                      Compressive
                   Weight      Tensile Strength         Strength
               per cubic foot    per sq. inch         per sq. inch
  Material        in lbs.           in lbs.              in lbs.
  Spruce....    25               8,000                5,000
  Aluminum         162              16,000              ......
  Brass (sheet)    510              23,000               12,000
  Steel (tool)     490             100,000               40,000
  Copper (sheet)   548              30,000               40,000


      As extreme lightness, combined with strength, especially tensile strength,
      is the great essential in flying-machine construction, it can be readily
      seen that the use of metal, even aluminum, for the framework, is
      prohibited by its weight. While aluminum has double the strength of spruce
      wood it is vastly heavier, and thus the advantage it has in strength is
      overbalanced many times by its weight. The specific gravity of aluminum is
      2.50; that of spruce is only 0.403.
    

      Things to Be Considered.
    

      In laying out plans for a flying machine there are five important points
      which should be settled upon before the actual work of construction is
      started. These are:
    

      First—Approximate weight of the machine when finished and equipped.
    

      Second—Area of the supporting surface required.
    

      Third—Amount of power that will be necessary to secure the desired
      speed and lifting capacity.
    

      Fourth—Exact dimensions of the main framework and of the auxiliary
      parts.
    

      Fifth—Size, speed and character of the propeller.
    

      In deciding upon these it will be well to take into consideration the
      experience of expert aviators regarding these features as given elsewhere.
      (See Chapter X.)
    

      Estimating the Weights Involved.
    

      In fixing upon the probable approximate weight in advance of construction
      much, of course, must be assumed. This means that it will be a matter of
      advance estimating. If a two-passenger machine is to be built we will
      start by assuming the maximum combined weight of the two people to be 350
      pounds. Most of the professional aviators are lighter than this. Taking
      the medium between the weights of the Curtiss and Wright machines we have
      a net average of 850 pounds for the framework, motor, propeller, etc.
      This, with the two passengers, amounts to 1,190 pounds. As the machines
      quoted are in successful operation it will be reasonable to assume that
      this will be a safe basis to operate on.
    

      What the Novice Must Avoid.
    

      This does not mean, however, that it will be safe to follow these weights
      exactly in construction, but that they will serve merely as a basis to
      start from. Because an expert can turn out a machine, thoroughly equipped,
      of 850 pounds weight, it does not follow that a novice can do the same
      thing. The expert's work is the result of years of experience, and he has
      learned how to construct frames and motor plants of the utmost lightness
      and strength.
    

      It will be safer for the novice to assume that he can not duplicate the
      work of such men as Wright and Curtiss without adding materially to the
      gross weight of the framework and equipment minus passengers.
    

      How to Distribute the Weight.
    

      Let us take 1,030 pounds as the net weight of the machine as against the
      same average in the Wright and Curtiss machines. Now comes the question of
      distributing this weight between the framework, motor, and other
      equipment. As a general proposition the framework should weigh about twice
      as much as the complete power plant (this is for amateur work).
    

      The word "framework" indicates not only the wooden frames of the main
      planes, auxiliary planes, rudders, etc., but the cloth coverings as well—everything
      in fact except the engine and propeller.
    

      On the basis named the framework would weigh 686 pounds, and the power
      plant 344. These figures are liberal, and the results desired may be
      obtained well within them as the novice will learn as he makes progress in
      the work.
    

      Figuring on Surface Area.
    

      It was Prof. Langley who first brought into prominence in connection with
      flying machine construction the mathematical principle that the larger the
      object the smaller may be the relative area of support. As explained in
      Chapter XIII, there are mechanical limits as to size which it is not
      practical to exceed, but the main principle remains in effect.
    

      Take two aeroplanes of marked difference in area of surface. The larger
      will, as a rule, sustain a greater weight in relative proportion to its
      area than the smaller one, and do the work with less relative horsepower.
      As a general thing well-constructed machines will average a supporting
      capacity of one pound for every one-half square foot of surface area.
      Accepting this as a working rule we find that to sustain a weight of 1,200
      pounds—machine and two passengers—we should have 600 square
      feet of surface.
    

      Distributing the Surface Area.
    

      The largest surfaces now in use are those of the Wright, Voisin and
      Antoinette machines—538 square feet in each. The actual sustaining
      power of these machines, so far as known, has never been tested to the
      limit; it is probable that the maximum is considerably in excess of what
      they have been called upon to show. In actual practice the average is a
      little over one pound for each one-half square foot of surface area.
    

      Allowing that 600 square feet of surface will be used, the next question
      is how to distribute it to the best advantage. This is another important
      matter in which individual preference must rule. We have seen how the
      professionals disagree on this point, some using auxiliary planes of large
      size, and others depending upon smaller auxiliaries with an increase in
      number so as to secure on a different plan virtually the same amount of
      surface.
    

      In deciding upon this feature the best thing to do is to follow the plans
      of some successful aviator, increasing the area of the auxiliaries in
      proportion to the increase in the area of the main planes. Thus, if you
      use 600 square feet of surface where the man whose plans you are following
      uses 500, it is simply a matter of making your planes one-fifth larger all
      around.
    

      The Cost of Production.
    

      Cost of production will be of interest to the amateur who essays to
      construct a flying machine. Assuming that the size decided upon is double
      that of the glider the material for the framework, timber, cloth, wire,
      etc., will cost a little more than double. This is because it must be
      heavier in proportion to the increased size of the framework, and heavy
      material brings a larger price than the lighter goods. If we allow $20 as
      the cost of the glider material it will be safe to put down the cost of
      that required for a real flying machine framework at $60, provided the
      owner builds it himself.
    

      As regards the cost of motor and similar equipment it can only be said
      that this depends upon the selection made. There are some reliable
      aviation motors which may be had as low as $500, and there are others
      which cost as much as $2,000.
    

      Services of Expert Necessary.
    

      No matter what kind of a motor may be selected the services of an expert
      will be necessary in its proper installation unless the amateur has
      considerable genius in this line himself. As a general thing $25 should be
      a liberal allowance for this work. No matter how carefully the engine may
      be placed and connected it will be largely a matter of luck if it is
      installed in exactly the proper manner at the first attempt. The chances
      are that several alterations, prompted by the results of trials, will have
      to be made. If this is the case the expert's bill may readily run up to
      $50. If the amateur is competent to do this part of the work the entire
      item of $50 may, of course, be cut out.
    

      As a general proposition a fairly satisfactory flying machine, one that
      will actually fly and carry the operator with it, may be constructed for
      $750, but it will lack the better qualities which mark the higher priced
      machines. This computation is made on the basis of $60 for material, $50
      for services of expert, $600 for motor, etc., and an allowance of $40 for
      extras.
    

      No man who has the flying machine germ in his system will be long
      satisfied with his first moderate price machine, no matter how well it may
      work. It's the old story of the automobile "bug" over again. The man who
      starts in with a modest $1,000 automobile invariably progresses by easy
      stages to the $4,000 or $5,000 class. The natural tendency is to want the
      biggest and best attainable within the financial reach of the owner.
    

      It's exactly the same way with the flying machine convert. The more
      proficient he becomes in the manipulation of his car, the stronger becomes
      the desire to fly further and stay in the air longer than the rest of his
      brethren. This necessitates larger, more powerful, and more expensive
      machines as the work of the germ progresses.
    

      Speed Affects Weight Capacity.
    

      Don't overlook the fact that the greater speed you can attain the smaller
      will be the surface area you can get along with. If a machine with 500
      square feet of sustaining surface, traveling at a speed of 40 miles an
      hour, will carry a weight of 1,200 pounds, we can cut the sustaining
      surface in half and get along with 250 square feet, provided a speed of 60
      miles an hour can be obtained. At 100 miles an hour only 80 square feet of
      surface area would be required. In both instances the weight sustaining
      capacity will remain the same as with the 500 square feet of surface area—1,200
      pounds.
    

      One of these days some mathematical genius will figure out this problem
      with exactitude and we will have a dependable table giving the maximum
      carrying capacity of various surface areas at various stated speeds, based
      on the dimensions of the advancing edges. At present it is largely a
      matter of guesswork so far as making accurate computation goes. Much
      depends upon the shape of the machine, and the amount of surface offering
      resistance to the wind, etc.
    


 








      CHAPTER IX. SELECTION OF THE MOTOR.
    

      Motors for flying machines must be light in weight, of great strength,
      productive of extreme speed, and positively dependable in action. It
      matters little as to the particular form, or whether air or water cooled,
      so long as the four features named are secured. There are at least a dozen
      such motors or engines now in use. All are of the gasolene type, and all
      possess in greater or lesser degree the desired qualities. Some of these
      motors are:
    

      Renault—8-cylinder, air-cooled; 50 horse power; weight 374 pounds.
    

      Fiat—8-cylinder, air-cooled; 50 horse power; weight 150 pounds.
    

      Farcot—8-cylinder, air-cooled; from 30 to 100 horse power, according
      to bore of cylinders; weight of smallest, 84 pounds.
    

      R. E. P.—10-cylinder, air-cooled; 150 horse power; weight 215
      pounds.
    

      Gnome—7 and 14 cylinders, revolving type, air-cooled; 50 and 100
      horse power; weight 150 and 300 pounds.
    

      Darracq—2 to 14 cylinders, water cooled; 30 to 200 horse power;
      weight of smallest 100 pounds.
    

      Wright—4-cylinder, water-cooled; 25 horse power; weight 200 pounds.
    

      Antoinette—8 and 16-cylinder, water-cooled; 50 and 100 horse power;
      weight 250 and 500 pounds.
    

      E. N. V.—8-cylinder, water-cooled; from 30 to 80 horse power,
      according to bore of cylinder; weight 150 to 400 pounds.
    

      Curtiss—8-cylinder, water-cooled; 60 horse power; weight 300 pounds.
    

      Average Weight Per Horse Power.
    

      It will be noticed that the Gnome motor is unusually light, being about
      three pounds to the horse power produced, as opposed to an average of 4
      1/2 pounds per horse power in other makes. This result is secured by the
      elimination of the fly-wheel, the engine itself revolving, thus obtaining
      the same effect that would be produced by a fly-wheel. The Farcot is even
      lighter, being considerably less than three pounds per horse power, which
      is the nearest approach to the long-sought engine equipment that will make
      possible a complete flying machine the total weight of which will not
      exceed one pound per square foot of area.
    

      How Lightness Is Secured.
    

      Thus far foreign manufacturers are ahead of Americans in the production of
      light-weight aerial motors, as is evidenced by the Gnome and Farcot
      engines, both of which are of French make. Extreme lightness is made
      possible by the use of fine, specially prepared steel for the cylinders,
      thus permitting them to be much thinner than if ordinary forms of steel
      were used. Another big saving in weight is made by substituting what are
      known as "auto lubricating" alloys for bearings. These alloys are made of
      a combination of aluminum and magnesium.
    

      Still further gains are made in the use of alloy steel tubing instead of
      solid rods, and also by the paring away of material wherever it can be
      done without sacrificing strength. This plan, with the exclusive use of
      the best grades of steel, regardless of cost, makes possible a marked
      reduction in weight.
    

      Multiplicity of Cylinders.
    

      Strange as it may seem, multiplicity of cylinders does not always add
      proportionate weight. Because a 4-cylinder motor weighs say 100 pounds, it
      does not necessarily follow that an 8-cylinder equipment will weigh 200
      pounds. The reason of this will be plain when it is understood that many
      of the parts essential to a 4-cylinder motor will fill the requirements of
      an 8-cylinder motor without enlargement or addition.
    

      Neither does multiplying the cylinders always increase the horsepower
      proportionately. If a 4-cylinder motor is rated at 25 horsepower it is not
      safe to take it for granted that double the number of cylinders will give
      50 horsepower. Generally speaking, eight cylinders, the bore, stroke and
      speed being the same, will give double the power that can be obtained from
      four, but this does not always hold good. Just why this exception should
      occur is not explainable by any accepted rule.
    

      Horse Power and Speed.
    

      Speed is an important requisite in a flying-machine motor, as the velocity
      of the aeroplane is a vital factor in flotation. At first thought, the
      propeller and similar adjuncts being equal, the inexperienced mind would
      naturally argue that a 50-horsepower engine should produce just double the
      speed of one of 25-horsepower. That this is a fallacy is shown by actual
      performances. The Wrights, using a 25-horsepower motor, have made 44 miles
      an hour, while Bleriot, with a 50-horsepower motor, has a record of a
      short-distance flight at the rate of 52 miles an hour. The fact is that,
      so far as speed is concerned, much depends upon the velocity of the wind,
      the size and shape of the aeroplane itself, and the size, shape and
      gearing of the propeller. The stronger the wind is blowing the easier it
      will be for the aeroplane to ascend, but at the same time the more
      difficult it will be to make headway against the wind in a horizontal
      direction. With a strong head wind, and proper engine force, your machine
      will progress to a certain extent, but it will be at an angle. If the
      aviator desired to keep on going upward this would be all right, but there
      is a limit to the altitude which it is desirable to reach—from 100
      to 500 feet for experts—and after that it becomes a question of
      going straight ahead.
    

      Great Waste of Power.
    

      One thing is certain—even in the most efficient of modern aerial
      motors there is a great loss of power between the two points of production
      and effect. The Wright outfit, which is admittedly one of the most
      effective in use, takes one horsepower of force for the raising and
      propulsion of each 50 pounds of weight. This, for a 25-horsepower engine,
      would give a maximum lifting capacity of 1250 pounds. It is doubtful if
      any of the higher rated motors have greater efficiency. As an 8-cylinder
      motor requires more fuel to operate than a 4-cylinder, it naturally
      follows that it is more expensive to run than the smaller motor, and a
      normal increase in capacity, taking actual performances as a criterion, is
      lacking. In other words, what is the sense of using an 8-cylinder motor
      when one of 4 cylinders is sufficient?
    

      What the Propeller Does.
    

      Much of the efficiency of the motor is due to the form and gearing of the
      propeller. Here again, as in other vital parts of flying-machine
      mechanism, we have a wide divergence of opinion as to the best form. A
      fish makes progress through the water by using its fins and tail; a bird
      makes its way through the air in a similar manner by the use of its wings
      and tail. In both instances the motive power comes from the body of the
      fish or bird.
    

      In place of fins or wings the flying machine is equipped with a propeller,
      the action of which is furnished by the engine. Fins and wings have been
      tried, but they don't work.
    

      While operating on the same general principle, aerial propellers are much
      larger than those used on boats. This is because the boat propeller has a
      denser, more substantial medium to work in (water), and consequently can
      get a better "hold," and produce more propulsive force than one of the
      same size revolving in the air. This necessitates the aerial propellers
      being much larger than those employed for marine purposes. Up to this
      point all aviators agree, but as to the best form most of them differ.
    

      Kinds of Propellers Used.
    

      One of the most simple is that used by Curtiss. It consists of two
      pear-shaped blades of laminated wood, each blade being 5 inches wide at
      its extreme point, tapering slightly to the shaft connection. These blades
      are joined at the engine shaft, in a direct line. The propeller has a
      pitch of 5 feet, and weighs, complete, less than 10 pounds. The length
      from end to end of the two blades is 6 1/2 feet.
    

      Wright uses two wooden propellers, in the rear of his biplane, revolving
      in opposite directions. Each propeller is two-bladed.
    

      Bleriot also uses a two-blade wooden propeller, but it is placed in front
      of his machine. The blades are each about 3 1/2 feet long and have an
      acute "twist."
    

      Santos-Dumont uses a two-blade wooden propeller, strikingly similar to the
      Bleriot.
    

      On the Antoinette monoplane, with which good records have been made, the
      propeller consists of two spoon-shaped pieces of metal, joined at the
      engine shaft in front, and with the concave surfaces facing the machine.
    

      The propeller on the Voisin biplane is also of metal, consisting of two
      aluminum blades connected by a forged steel arm.
    

      Maximum thrust, or stress—exercise of the greatest air-displacing
      force—is the object sought. This, according to experts, is best
      obtained with a large propeller diameter and reasonably low speed. The
      diameter is the distance from end to end of the blades, which on the
      largest propellers ranges from 6 to 8 feet. The larger the blade surface
      the greater will be the volume of air displaced, and, following this, the
      greater will be the impulse which forces the aeroplane ahead. In all
      centrifugal motion there is more or less tendency to disintegration in the
      form of "flying off" from the center, and the larger the revolving object
      is the stronger is this tendency. This is illustrated in the many
      instances in which big grindstones and fly-wheels have burst from being
      revolved too fast. To have a propeller break apart in the air would
      jeopardize the life of the aviator, and to guard against this it has been
      found best to make its revolving action comparatively slow. Besides this
      the slow motion (it is only comparatively slow) gives the atmosphere a
      chance to refill the area disturbed by one propeller blade, and thus have
      a new surface for the next blade to act upon.
    

      Placing of the Motor.
    

      As on other points, aviators differ widely in their ideas as to the proper
      position for the motor. Wright locates his on the lower plane, midway
      between the front and rear edges, but considerably to one side of the
      exact center. He then counter-balances the engine weight by placing his
      seat far enough away in the opposite direction to preserve the center of
      gravity. This leaves a space in the center between the motor and the
      operator in which a passenger may be carried without disturbing the
      equilibrium.
    

      Bleriot, on the contrary, has his motor directly in front and preserves
      the center of gravity by taking his seat well back, this, with the weight
      of the aeroplane, acting as a counter-balance.
    

      On the Curtiss machine the motor is in the rear, the forward seat of the
      operator, and weight of the horizontal rudder and damping plane in front
      equalizing the engine weight.
    

      No Perfect Motor as Yet.
    

      Engine makers in the United States, England, France and Germany are all
      seeking to produce an ideal motor for aviation purposes. Many of the
      productions are highly creditable, but it may be truthfully said that none
      of them quite fill the bill as regards a combination of the minimum of
      weight with the maximum of reliable maintained power. They are all, in
      some respects, improvements upon those previously in use, but the great
      end sought for has not been fully attained.
    

      One of the motors thus produced was made by the French firm of Darracq at
      the suggestion of Santos Dumont, and on lines laid down by him. Santos
      Dumont wanted a 2-cylinder horizontal motor capable of developing 30
      horsepower, and not exceeding 4 1/2 pounds per horsepower in weight.
    

      There can be no question as to the ability and skill of the Darracq
      people, or of their desire to produce a motor that would bring new credit
      and prominence to the firm. Neither could anything radically wrong be
      detected in the plans. But the motor, in at least one important
      requirement, fell short of expectations.
    

      It could not be depended upon to deliver an energy of 30 horsepower
      continuously for any length of time. Its maximum power could be secured
      only in "spurts."
    

      This tends to show how hard it is to produce an ideal motor for aviation
      purposes. Santos Dumont, of undoubted skill and experience as an aviator,
      outlined definitely what he wanted; one of the greatest designers in the
      business drew the plans, and the famous house of Darracq bent its best
      energies to the production. But the desired end was not fully attained.
    

      Features of Darracq Motor.
    

      Horizontal motors were practically abandoned some time ago in favor of the
      vertical type, but Santos Dumont had a logical reason for reverting to
      them. He wanted to secure a lower center of gravity than would be possible
      with a vertical engine. Theoretically his idea was correct as the
      horizontal motor lies flat, and therefore offers less resistance to the
      wind, but it did not work out as desired.
    

      At the same time it must be admitted that this Darracq motor is a marvel
      of ingenuity and exquisite workmanship. The two cylinders, having a bore
      of 5 1-10 inches and a stroke of 4 7-10 inches, are machined out of a
      solid bar of steel until their weight is only 8 4-5 pounds complete. The
      head is separate, carrying the seatings for the inlet and exhaust valves,
      is screwed onto the cylinder, and then welded in position. A copper
      water-jacket is fitted, and it is in this condition that the weight of 8
      4-5 pounds is obtained.
    

      On long trips, especially in regions where gasolene is hard to get, the
      weight of the fuel supply is an important feature in aviation. As a
      natural consequence flying machine operators favor the motor of greatest
      economy in gasolene consumption, provided it gives the necessary power.
    

      An American inventor, Ramsey by name, is working on a motor which is said
      to possess great possibilities in this line. Its distinctive features
      include a connecting rod much shorter than usual, and a crank shaft
      located the length of the crank from the central axis of the cylinder.
      This has the effect of increasing the piston stroke, and also of
      increasing the proportion of the crank circle during which effective
      pressure is applied to the crank.
    

      Making the connecting rod shorter and leaving the crank mechanism the same
      would introduce excessive cylinder friction. This Ramsey overcomes by the
      location of his crank shaft. The effect of the long piston stroke thus
      secured, is to increase the expansion of the gases, which in turn
      increases the power of the engine without increasing the amount of fuel
      used.
    

      Propeller Thrust Important.
    

      There is one great principle in flying machine propulsion which must not
      be overlooked. No matter how powerful the engine may be unless the
      propeller thrust more than overcomes the wind pressure there can be no
      progress forward. Should the force of this propeller thrust and that of
      the wind pressure be equal the result is obvious. The machine is at a
      stand-still so far as forward progress is concerned and is deprived of the
      essential advancing movement.
    

      Speed not only furnishes sustentation for the airship, but adds to the
      stability of the machine. An aeroplane which may be jerky and uncertain in
      its movements, so far as equilibrium is concerned, when moving at a slow
      gait, will readily maintain an even keel when the speed is increased.
    

      Designs for Propeller Blades.
    

      It is the object of all men who design propellers to obtain the maximum of
      thrust with the minimum expenditure of engine energy. With this purpose in
      view many peculiar forms of propeller blades have been evolved. In theory
      it would seem that the best effects could be secured with blades so shaped
      as to present a thin (or cutting) edge when they come out of the wind, and
      then at the climax of displacement afford a maximum of surface so as to
      displace as much air as possible. While this is the form most generally
      favored there are others in successful operation.
    

      There is also wide difference in opinion as to the equipment of the
      propeller shaft with two or more blades. Some aviators use two and some
      four. All have more or less success. As a mathematical proposition it
      would seem that four blades should give more propulsive force than two,
      but here again comes in one of the puzzles of aviation, as this result is
      not always obtained.
    

      Difference in Propeller Efficiency.
    

      That there is a great difference in propeller efficiency is made readily
      apparent by the comparison of effects produced in two leading makes of
      machines—the Wright and the Voisin.
    

      In the former a weight of from 1,100 to 1,200 pounds is sustained and
      advance progress made at the rate of 40 miles an hour and more, with half
      the engine speed of a 25 horse-power motor. This would be a sustaining
      capacity of 48 pounds per horsepower. But the actual capacity of the
      Wright machine, as already stated, is 50 pounds per horsepower.
    

      The Voisin machine, with aviator, weighs about 1,370 pounds, and is
      operated with a so-horsepower motor. Allowing it the same speed as the
      Wright we find that, with double the engine energy, the lifting capacity
      is only 27 1/2 pounds per horsepower. To what shall we charge this
      remarkable difference? The surface of the planes is exactly the same in
      both machines so there is no advantage in the matter of supporting area.
    

      Comparison of Two Designs.
    

      On the Wright machine two wooden propellers of two blades each (each blade
      having a decided "twist") are used. As one 25 horsepower motor drives both
      propellers the engine energy amounts to just one-half of this for each, or
      12 1/2 horsepower. And this energy is utilized at one-half the normal
      engine speed.
    

      On the Voisin a radically different system is employed. Here we have one
      metal two-bladed propeller with a very slight "twist" to the blade
      surfaces. The full energy of a 50-horsepower motor is utilized.
    

      Experts Fail to Agree.
    

      Why should there be such a marked difference in the results obtained? Who
      knows? Some experts maintain that it is because there are two propellers
      on the Wright machine and only one on the Voisin, and consequently double
      the propulsive power is exerted. But this is not a fair deduction, unless
      both propellers are of the same size. Propulsive power depends upon the
      amount of air displaced, and the energy put into the thrust which
      displaces the air.
    

      Other experts argue that the difference in results may be traced to the
      difference in blade design, especially in the matter of "twist."
    

      The fact is that propeller results depend largely upon the nature of the
      aeroplanes on which they are used. A propeller, for instance, which gives
      excellent results on one type of aeroplane, will not work satisfactorily
      on another.
    

      There are some features, however, which may be safely adopted in propeller
      selection. These are: As extensive a diameter as possible; blade area 10
      to 15 per cent of the area swept; pitch four-fifths of the diameter;
      rotation slow. The maximum of thrust effort will be thus obtained.
    


 








      CHAPTER X. PROPER DIMENSIONS OF MACHINES.
    

      In laying out plans for a flying machine the first thing to decide upon is
      the size of the plane surfaces. The proportions of these must be based
      upon the load to be carried. This includes the total weight of the machine
      and equipment, and also the operator. This will be a rather difficult
      problem to figure out exactly, but practical approximate figures may be
      reached.
    

      It is easy to get at the weight of the operator, motor and propeller, but
      the matter of determining, before they are constructed, what the planes,
      rudders, auxiliaries, etc., will weigh when completed is an intricate
      proposition. The best way is to take the dimensions of some successful
      machine and use them, making such alterations in a minor way as you may
      desire.
    

      Dimensions of Leading Machines.
    

      In the following tables will be found the details as to surface area,
      weight, power, etc., of the nine principal types of flying machines which
      are now prominently before the public:
    

                             MONOPLANES.
                              Surface area    Spread in     Depth in
   Make          Passengers     sq. feet      linear feet  linear
   feet
   Santos-Dumont.. 1           110             16.0         26.0
   Bleriot..... 1           150.6           24.6         22.0
   R. E. P..... 1           215             34.1         28.9
   Bleriot..... 2           236             32.9         23.0
   Antoinette.... 2           538             41.2         37.9
                  No. of                  Weight Without
   Propeller
   Make         Cylinders   Horse Power       Operator
   Diameter
   Santos-Dumont.. 2          30                250            5.0
   Bleriot..... 3          25                680            6.9
   R. E. P..... 7          35                900            6.6
   Bleriot..... 7          50              1,240            8.1
   Antoinette... 8          50              1,040            7.2

                               BIPLANES.
                            Surface Area       Spread in      Depth
   in
   Make      Passengers       sq. feet        linear feet    linear
   feet
   Curtiss... 2               258             29.0
   28.7
   Wright.... 2               538             41.0
   30.7
   Farman.... 2               430             32.9
   39.6
   Voisin.... 2               538             37.9
   39.6

                No. of                     Weight Without
   Propeller
   Make       Cylinders      Horse Power      Operator
   Diameter
   Curtiss... 8               50               600          6.0
   Wright.... 4               25             1,100          8.1
   Farman.... 7               50             1,200          8.9
   Voisin.... 8               50             1,200          6.6


      In giving the depth dimensions the length over all—from the extreme
      edge of the front auxiliary plane to the extreme tip of the rear is
      stated. Thus while the dimensions of the main planes of the Wright machine
      are 41 feet spread by 6 1/2 feet in depth, the depth over all is 30.7.
    

      Figuring Out the Details.
    

      With this data as a guide it should be comparatively easy to decide upon
      the dimensions of the machine required. In arriving at the maximum lifting
      capacity the weight of the operator must be added. Assuming this to
      average 170 pounds the method of procedure would be as follows:
    

      Add the weight of the operator to the weight of the complete machine. The
      new Wright machine complete weighs 900 pounds. This, plus 170, the weight
      of the operator, gives a total of 1,070 pounds. There are 538 square feet
      of supporting surface, or practically one square foot of surface area to
      each two pounds of load.
    

      There are some machines, notably the Bleriot, in which the supporting
      power is much greater. In this latter instance we find a surface area of
      150 1/2 square feet carrying a load of 680 plus 170, or an aggregate of
      850 pounds. This is the equivalent of five pounds to the square foot. This
      ratio is phenomenally large, and should not be taken as a guide by
      amateurs.
    

      The Matter of Passengers.
    

      These deductions are based on each machine carrying one passenger, which
      is admittedly the limit at present of the monoplanes like those operated
      for record-making purposes by Santos-Dumont and Bleriot. The biplanes,
      however, have a two-passenger capacity, and this adds materially to the
      proportion of their weight-sustaining power as compared with the surface
      area. In the following statement all the machines are figured on the
      one-passenger basis. Curtiss and Wright have carried two passengers on
      numerous occasions, and an extra 170 pounds should therefore be added to
      the total weight carried, which would materially increase the capacity.
      Even with the two-passenger load the limit is by no means reached, but as
      experiments have gone no further it is impossible to make more accurate
      figures.
    

      Average Proportions of Load.
    

      It will be interesting, before proceeding to lay out the dimension
      details, to make a comparison of the proportion of load effect with the
      supporting surfaces of various well-known machines. Here are the figures:
    

      Santos-Dumont—A trifle under four pounds per square foot.
    

      Bleriot—Five pounds.
    

      R. E. P.—Five pounds.
    

      Antoinette—About two and one-quarter pounds.
    

      Curtiss—About two and one-half pounds.
    

      Wright—Two and one-quarter pounds.
    

      Farman—A trifle over three pounds.
    

      Voisin—A little under two and one-half pounds.
    

      Importance of Engine Power.
    

      While these figures are authentic, they are in a way misleading, as the
      important factor of engine power is not taken into consideration. Let us
      recall the fact that it is the engine power which keeps the machine in
      motion, and that it is only while in motion that the machine will remain
      suspended in the air. Hence, to attribute the support solely to the
      surface area is erroneous. True, that once under headway the planes
      contribute largely to the sustaining effect, and are absolutely essential
      in aerial navigation—the motor could not rise without them—still,
      when it comes to a question of weight-sustaining power, we must also
      figure on the engine capacity.
    

      In the Wright machine, in which there is a lifting capacity of
      approximately 2 1/4 pounds to the square foot of surface area, an engine
      of only 25 horsepower is used. In the Curtiss, which has a lifting
      capacity of 2 1/2 pounds per square foot, the engine is of 50 horsepower.
      This is another of the peculiarities of aerial construction and
      navigation. Here we have a gain of 1/4 pound in weight-lifting capacity
      with an expenditure of double the horsepower. It is this feature which
      enables Curtiss to get along with a smaller surface area of supporting
      planes at the expense of a big increase in engine power. Proper Weight of
      Machine.
    

      As a general proposition the most satisfactory machine for amateur
      purposes will be found to be one with a total weight-sustaining power of
      about 1,200 pounds. Deducting 170 pounds as the weight of the operator,
      this will leave 1,030 pounds for the complete motor-equipped machine, and
      it should be easy to construct one within this limit. This implies, of
      course, that due care will be taken to eliminate all superfluous weight by
      using the lightest material compatible with strength and safety.
    

      This plan will admit of 686 pounds weight in the frame work, coverings,
      etc., and 344 for the motor, propeller, etc., which will be ample. Just
      how to distribute the weight of the planes is a matter which must be left
      to the ingenuity of the builder.
    

      Comparison of Bird Power.
    

      There is an interesting study in the accompanying illustration. Note that
      the surface area of the albatross is much smaller than that of the
      vulture, although the wing spread is about the same. Despite this the
      albatross accomplishes fully as much in the way of flight and soaring as
      the vulture. Why? Because the albaboss is quicker and more powerful in
      action. It is the application of this same principle in flying machines
      which enables those of great speed and power to get along with less
      supporting surface than those of slower movement.
    

      Measurements of Curtiss Machine.
    

      Some idea of framework proportion may be had from the following
      description of the Curtiss machine. The main planes have a spread (width)
      of 29 feet, and are 4 1/2 feet deep. The front double surface horizontal
      rudder is 6x2 feet, with an area of 24 square feet. To the rear of the
      main planes is a single surface horizontal plane 6x2 feet, with an area of
      12 square feet. In connection with this is a vertical rudder 2 1/2 feet
      square. Two movable ailerons, or balancing planes, are placed at the
      extreme ends of the upper planes. These are 6x2 feet, and have a combined
      area of 24 square feet. There is also a triangular shaped vertical
      steadying surface in connection with the front rudder.
    

      Thus we have a total of 195 square feet, but as the official figures are
      258, and the size of the triangular-shaped steadying surface is unknown,
      we must take it for granted that this makes up the difference. In the
      matter of proportion the horizontal double-plane rudder is about one-tenth
      the size of the main plane, counting the surface area of only one plane,
      the vertical rudder one-fortieth, and the ailerons one-twentieth.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Flying Machines: Construction and Operation
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.
Title: Flying Machines: Construction and Operation

Author: William J. Jackman
 Octave Chanute
 Thomas Herbert Russell

Release date: May 1, 1997 [eBook #907]
                Most recently updated: February 7, 2013
Language: English
Credits: Produced by Charles Keller, and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLYING MACHINES: CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION ***