CHAPTER XVII. SOME OF THE NEW DESIGNS.
Spurred on by the success attained by the more experienced and better
      known aviators numerous inventors of lesser fame are almost daily
      producing practical flying machines varying radically in construction from
      those now in general use.
One of these comparatively new designs is the Van Anden biplane, made by
      Frank Van Anden of Islip, Long Island, a member of the New York Aeronautic
      Society. While his machine is wholly experimental, many successful short
      flights were made with it last fall (1909). One flight, made October 19th,
      1909, is of particular interest as showing the practicability of an
      automatic stabilizing device installed by the inventor. The machine was
      caught in a sudden severe gust of wind and keeled over, but almost
      immediately righted itself, thus demonstrating in a most satisfactory
      manner the value of one new attachment.
Features of Van Anden Model.
In size the surfaces of the main biplane are 26 feet in spread, and 4 feet
      in depth from front to rear. The upper and lower planes are 4 feet apart.
      Silkolene coated with varnish is used for the coverings. Ribs (spruce) are
      curved one inch to the foot, the deepest part of the curve (4 inches)
      being one foot back from the front edge of the horizontal beam. Struts
      (also of spruce, as is all the framework) are elliptical in shape. The
      main beams are in three sections, nearly half round in form, and joined by
      metal sleeves.
There is a two-surface horizontal rudder, 2x2x4 feet, in front. This is
      pivoted at its lateral center 8 feet from the front edge of the main
      planes. In the rear is another two-surface horizontal rudder 2x2x2 1/2
      feet, pivoted in the same manner as the front one, 15 feet from the rear
      edges of the main planes.
Hinged to the rear central strut of the rear rudder is a vertical rudder 2
      feet high by 3 feet in length.
The Method of Control.
In the operation of these rudders—both front and rear—and the
      elevation and depression of the main planes, the Curtiss system is
      employed. Pushing the steering-wheel post outward depresses the front
      edges of the planes, and brings the machine downward; pulling the
      steering-wheel post inward elevates the front edges of the planes and
      causes the machine to ascend.
Turning the steering wheel itself to the right swings the tail rudder to
      the left, and the machine, obeying this like a boat, turns in the same
      direction as the wheel is turned. By like cause turning the wheel to the
      left turns the machine to the left.
Automatic Control of Wings.
There are two wing tips, each of 6 feet spread (length) and 2 feet from
      front to rear. These are hinged half way between the main surfaces to the
      two outermost rear struts. Cables run from these to an automatic device
      working with power from the engine, which automatically operates the tips
      with the tilting of the machine. Normally the wing tips are held
      horizontal by stiff springs introduced in the cables outside of the
      device.
It was the successful working of this device which righted the Van Anden
      craft when it was overturned in the squall of October 19th, 1909. Previous
      to that occurrence Mr. Van Anden had looked upon the device as purely
      experimental, and had admitted that he had grave uncertainty as to how it
      would operate in time of emergency. He is now quoted as being thoroughly
      satisfied with its practicability. It is this automatic device which gives
      the Van Anden machine at least one distinctively new feature.
While on this subject it will not be amiss to add that Mr. Curtiss does
      not look kindly on automatic control. "I would rather trust to my own
      action than that of a machine," he says. This is undoubtedly good logic so
      far as Mr. Curtiss is concerned, but all aviators are not so cool-headed
      and resourceful.
Motive Power of Van Anden.
A 50-horsepower "H-F" water cooled motor drives a laminated wood propeller
      6 feet in diameter, with a 17 degree pitch at the extremities, increasing
      toward the hub. The rear end of the motor is about 6 inches back from the
      rear transverse beam and the engine shaft is in a direct line with the
      axes of the two horizontal rudders. An R. I. V. ball bearing carries the
      shaft at this point. Flying, the motor turns at about 800 revolutions per
      minute, delivering 180 pounds pull. A test of the motor running at 1,200
      showed a pull of 250 pounds on the scales.
Still Another New Aeroplane.
Another new aeroplane is that produced by A. M. Herring (an old-timer) and
      W. S. Burgess, under the name of the Herring-Burgess. This is also
      equipped with an automatic stability device for maintaining the balance
      transversely. The curvature of the planes is also laid out on new lines.
      That this new plan is effective is evidenced by the fact that the machine
      has been elevated to an altitude of 40 feet by using one-half the power of
      the 30-horsepower motor.
The system of rudder and elevation control is very simple. The aviator
      sits in front of the lower plane, and extending his arms, grasps two
      supports which extend down diagonally in front. On the under side of these
      supports just beneath his fingers are the controls which operate the
      vertical rudder, in the rear. Thus, if he wishes to turn to the right, he
      presses the control under the fingers of his right hand; if to the left,
      that under the fingers of his left hand. The elevating rudder is operated
      by the aviator's right foot, the control being placed on a foot-rest.
Motor Is Extremely Light.
Not the least notable feature of the craft is its motor. Although
      developing, under load, 30-horsepower, or that of an ordinary automobile,
      it weighs, complete, hardly 100 pounds. Having occasion to move it a
      little distance for inspection, Mr. Burgess picked it up and walked off
      with it—cylinders, pistons, crankcase and all, even the magneto,
      being attached. There are not many 30-horsepower engines which can be so
      handled. Everything about it is reduced to its lowest terms of simplicity,
      and hence, of weight. A single camshaft operates not only all of the inlet
      and exhaust valves, but the magneto and gear water pump, as well. The
      motor is placed directly behind the operator, and the propeller is
      directly mounted on the crankshaft.
This weight of less than 100 pounds, it must be remembered, is not for the
      motor alone; it includes the entire power plant equipment.
The "thrust" of the propeller is also extraordinary, being between 250 and
      260 pounds. The force of the wind displacement is strong enough to knock
      down a good-sized boy as one youngster ascertained when he got behind the
      propeller as it was being tested. He was not only knocked down but driven
      for some distance away from the machine. The propeller has four blades
      which are but little wider than a lath.
Machine Built by Students.
Students at the University of Pennsylvania, headed by Laurence J. Lesh, a
      protege of Octave Chanute, have constructed a practical aeroplane of
      ordinary maximum size, in which is incorporated many new ideas. The most
      unique of these is to be found in the steering gear, and the provision
      made for the accommodation of a pupil while taking lessons under an
      experienced aviator.
Immediately back of the aviator is an extra seat and an extra steering
      wheel which works in tandem style with the front wheel. By this
      arrangement a beginner may be easily and quickly taught to have perfect
      control of the machine. These tandem wheels are also handy for passengers
      who may wish to operate the car independently of one another, it being
      understood, of course, that there will be no conflict of action.
Frame Size and Engine Power.
The frame has 36 feet spread and measures 35 feet from the front edge to
      the end of the tail in the rear. It is equipped with two rear propellers
      operated by a Ramsey 8-cylinder motor of 50 horsepower, placed
      horizontally across the lower plane, with the crank shaft running clear
      through the engine.
The "Pennsylvania I" is the first two-propeller biplane chainless car,
      this scheme having been adopted in order to avoid the crossing of chains.
      The lateral control is by a new invention by Octave Chanute and Laurence
      J. Lesh, for which Lesh is now applying for a patent. The device was
      worked out before the Wright brothers' suit was begun, and is said to be
      superior to the Wright warping or the Curtiss ailerons. The landing device
      is also new in design. This aeroplane will weigh about 1,500 pounds, and
      will carry fuel for a flight of 150 miles, and it is expected to attain a
      speed of at least 45 miles an hour.
There are others, lots of them, too numerous in fact to admit of mention
      in a book of this size.