CHAPTER VI. LEARNING TO FLY.
Don't be too ambitious at the start. Go slow, and avoid unnecessary risks.
      At its best there is an element of danger in aviation which cannot be
      entirely eliminated, but it may be greatly reduced and minimized by the
      use of common sense.
Theoretically, the proper way to begin a glide is from the top of an
      incline, facing against the wind, so that the machine will soar until the
      attraction of gravitation draws it gradually to the ground. This is the
      manner in which experienced aviators operate, but it must be kept in mind
      that these men are experts. They understand air currents, know how to
      control the action and direction of their machines by shifting the
      position of their bodies, and by so doing avoid accidents which would be
      unavoidable by a novice.
Begin on Level Ground.
Make your first flights on level ground, having a couple of men to assist
      you in getting the apparatus under headway. Take your position in the
      center rectangle, back far enough to give the forward edges of the glider
      an inclination to tilt upward very slightly. Now start and run forward at
      a moderately rapid gait, one man at each end of the glider assisting you.
      As the glider cuts into the air the wind will catch under the uplifted
      edges of the curved planes, and buoy it up so that it will rise in the air
      and take you with it. This rise will not be great, just enough to keep you
      well clear of the ground. Now project your legs a little to the front so
      as to shift the center of gravity a trifle and bring the edges of the
      glider on an exact level with the atmosphere. This, with the momentum
      acquired in the start, will keep the machine moving forward for some
      distance.
Effect of Body Movements.
When the weight of the body is slightly back of the center of gravity the
      edges of the advancing planes are tilted slightly upward. The glider in
      this position acts as a scoop, taking in the air which, in turn, lifts it
      off the ground. When a certain altitude is reached—this varies with
      the force of the wind—the tendency to a forward movement is lost and
      the glider comes to the ground. It is to prolong the forward movement as
      much as possible that the operator shifts the center of gravity slightly,
      bringing the apparatus on an even keel as it were by lowering the
      advancing edges. This done, so long as there is momentum enough to keep
      the glider moving, it will remain afloat.
If you shift your body well forward it will bring the front edges of the
      glider down, and elevate the rear ones. In this way the air will be
      "spilled" out at the rear, and, having lost the air support or buoyancy,
      the glider comes down to the ground. A few flights will make any ordinary
      man proficient in the control of his apparatus by his body movements, not
      only as concerns the elevating and depressing of the advancing edges, but
      also actual steering. You will quickly learn, for instance, that, as the
      shifting of the bodily weight backwards and forwards affects the upward
      and downward trend of the planes, so a movement sideways—to the left
      or the right—affects the direction in which the glider travels.
Ascends at an Angle.
In ascending, the glider and flying machine, like the bird, makes an
      angular, not a vertical flight. Just what this angle of ascension may be
      is difficult to determine. It is probable and in fact altogether likely,
      that it varies with the force of the wind, weight of the rising body,
      power of propulsion, etc. This, in the language of physicists, is the
      angle of inclination, and, as a general thing, under normal conditions
      (still air) should be put down as about one in ten, or 5 3/4 degrees. This
      would be an ideal condition, but it has not, as vet been reached. The
      force of the wind affects the angle considerably, as does also the weight
      and velocity of the apparatus. In general practice the angle varies from
      23 to 45 degrees. At more than 45 degrees the supporting effort is
      overcome by the resistance to forward motion.
Increasing the speed or propulsive force, tends to lessen the angle at
      which the machine may be successfully operated because it reduces the wind
      pressure. Most of the modern flying machines are operated at an angle of
      23 degrees, or less.
Maintaining an Equilibrium.
Stable equilibrium is one of the main essentials to successful flight, and
      this cannot be preserved in an uncertain, gusty wind, especially by an
      amateur. The novice should not attempt a glide unless the conditions are
      just right. These conditions are: A clear, level space, without
      obstructions, such as trees, etc., and a steady wind of not exceeding
      twelve miles an hour. Always fly against the wind.
When a reasonable amount of proficiency in the handling of the machine on
      level ground has been acquired the field of practice may be changed to
      some gentle slope. In starting from a slope it will be found easier to
      keep the machine afloat, but the experience at first is likely to be very
      disconcerting to a man of less than iron nerve. As the glider sails away
      from the top of the slope the distance between him and the ground
      increases rapidly until the aviator thinks he is up a hundred miles in the
      air. If he will keep cool, manipulate his apparatus so as to preserve its
      equilibrium, and "let nature take its course," he will come down gradually
      and safely to the ground at a considerable distance from the starting
      place. This is one advantage of starting from an elevation—your
      machine will go further.
But, if the aviator becomes "rattled"; if he loses control of his machine,
      serious results, including a bad fall with risk of death, are almost
      certain. And yet this practice is just as necessary as the initial lessons
      on level ground. When judgment is used, and "haste made slowly," there is
      very little real danger. While experimenting with gliders the Wrights made
      flights innumerable under all sorts of conditions and never had an
      accident of any kind.
Effects of Wind Currents.
The larger the machine the more difficult it will be to control its
      movements in the air, and yet enlargement is absolutely necessary as
      weight, in the form of motor, rudder, etc., is added.
Air currents near the surface of the ground are diverted by every
      obstruction unless the wind is blowing hard enough to remove the
      obstruction entirely. Take, for instance, the case of a tree or shrub, in
      a moderate wind of from ten to twelve miles an hour. As the wind strikes
      the tree it divides, part going to one side and part going to the other,
      while still another part is directed upward and goes over the top of the
      obstruction. This makes the handling of a glider on an obstructed field
      difficult and uncertain. To handle a glider successfully the place of
      operation should be clear and the wind moderate and steady. If it is gusty
      postpone your flight. In this connection it will be well to understand the
      velocity of the wind, and what it means as shown in the following table:
Miles per hour Feet per second     Pressure per sq. foot
          10                14.7                .492
          25                36.7                3.075
          50                73.3               12.300
          100              146.6               49.200
Pressure of wind increases in proportion to the square of the velocity.
      Thus wind at 10 miles an hour has four times the pressure of wind at 5
      miles an hour. The greater this pressure the large and heavier the object
      which can be raised. Any boy who has had experience in flying kites can
      testify to this, High winds, however, are almost invariably gusty and
      uncertain as to direction, and this makes them dangerous for aviators. It
      is also a self-evident fact that, beyond a certain stage, the harder the
      wind blows the more difficult it is to make headway against it.
Launching Device for Gliders.
On page 195 will be found a diagram of the various parts of a launcher for
      gliders, designed and patented by Mr. Octave Chanute. In describing this
      invention in Aeronautics, Mr. Chanute says:
"In practicing, the track, preferably portable, is generally laid in the
      direction of the existing wind and the car, preferably a light
      platform-car, is placed on the track. The truck carrying the winding-drum
      and its motor is placed to windward a suitable distance—say from two
      hundred to one thousand feet—and is firmly blocked or anchored in
      line with the portable track, which is preferably 80 or 100 feet in
      length. The flying or gliding machine to be launched with its operator is
      placed on the platform-car at the leeward end of the portable track. The
      line, which is preferably a flexible combination wire-and-cord cable, is
      stretched between the winding-drum on the track and detachably secured to
      the flying or gliding machine, preferably by means of a trip-hoop, or else
      held in the hand of the operator, so that the operator may readily detach
      the same from the flying-machine when the desired height is attained."
How Glider Is Started.
"Then upon a signal given by the operator the engineer at the motor puts
      it into operation, gradually increasing the speed until the line is wound
      upon the drum at a maximum speed of, say, thirty miles an hour. The
      operator of the flying-machine, whether he stands upright and carries it
      on his shoulders, or whether he sits or lies down prone upon it, adjusts
      the aeroplane or carrying surfaces so that the wind shall strike them on
      the top and press downward instead of upward until the platform-car under
      action of the winding-drum and line attains the required speed.
"When the operator judges that his speed is sufficient, and this depends
      upon the velocity of the wind as well as that of the car moving against
      the wind, he quickly causes the front of the flying-machine to tip upward,
      so that the relative wind striking on the under side of the planes or
      carrying surfaces shall lift the flying machine into the air. It then
      ascends like a kite to such height as may be desired by the operator, who
      then trips the hook and releases the line from the machine."
What the Operator Does.
"The operator being now free in the air has a certain initial velocity
      imparted by the winding-drum and line and also a potential energy
      corresponding to his height above the ground. If the flying or gliding
      machine is provided with a motor, he can utilize that in his further
      flight, and if it is a simple gliding machine without motor he can make a
      descending flight through the air to such distance as corresponds to the
      velocity acquired and the height gained, steering meanwhile by the devices
      provided for that purpose.
"The simplest operation or maneuver is to continue the flight straight
      ahead against the wind; but it is possible to vary this course to the
      right or left, or even to return in downward flight with the wind to the
      vicinity of the starting-point. Upon nearing the ground the operator tips
      upward his carrying-surfaces and stops his headway upon the cushion of
      increased air resistance so caused. The operator is in no way permanently
      fastened to his machine, and the machine and the operator simply rest upon
      the light platform-car, so that the operator is free to rise with the
      machine from the car whenever the required initial velocity is attained.
Motor For the Launcher.
"The motor may be of any suitable kind or construction, but is preferably
      an electric or gasolene motor. The winding-drum is furnished with any
      suitable or customary reversing-guide to cause the line to wind smoothly
      and evenly upon the drum. The line is preferably a cable composed of
      flexible wire and having a cotton or other cord core to increase its
      flexibility. The line extends from the drum to the flying or gliding
      machine. Its free end may, if desired, be grasped and held by the operator
      until the flying-machine ascends to the desired height, when by simply
      letting go of the line the operator may continue his flight free. The
      line, however, is preferably connected to the flying or gliding machine
      directly by a trip-hook having a handle or trip lever within reach of the
      operator, so that when he ascends to the required height he may readily
      detach the line from the flying or gliding machine."