PREFACE.
This book is written for the guidance of the novice in aviation—the
      man who seeks practical information as to the theory, construction and
      operation of the modern flying machine. With this object in view the
      wording is intentionally plain and non-technical. It contains some
      propositions which, so far as satisfying the experts is concerned, might
      doubtless be better stated in technical terms, but this would defeat the
      main purpose of its preparation. Consequently, while fully aware of its
      shortcomings in this respect, the authors have no apologies to make.
In the stating of a technical proposition so it may be clearly understood
      by people not versed in technical matters it becomes absolutely necessary
      to use language much different from that which an expert would employ, and
      this has been done in this volume.
No man of ordinary intelligence can read this book without obtaining a
      clear, comprehensive knowledge of flying machine construction and
      operation. He will learn, not only how to build, equip, and manipulate an
      aeroplane in actual flight, but will also gain a thorough understanding of
      the principle upon which the suspension in the air of an object much
      heavier than the air is made possible.
This latter feature should make the book of interest even to those who
      have no intention of constructing or operating a flying machine. It will
      enable them to better understand and appreciate the performances of the
      daring men like the Wright brothers, Curtiss, Bleriot, Farman, Paulhan,
      Latham, and others, whose bold experiments have made aviation an
      actuality.
For those who wish to engage in the fascinating pastime of construction
      and operation it is intended as a reliable, practical guide.
It may be well to explain that the sub-headings in the articles by Mr.
      Chanute were inserted by the authors without his knowledge. The purpose of
      this was merely to preserve uniformity in the typography of the book. This
      explanation is made in justice to Mr. Chanute.
THE AUTHORS.