CHAPTER XI. PLANE AND RUDDER CONTROL.
    

      Having constructed and equipped your machine, the next thing is to decide
      upon the method of controlling the various rudders and auxiliary planes by
      which the direction and equilibrium and ascending and descending of the
      machine are governed.
    

      The operator must be in position to shift instantaneously the position of
      rudders and planes, and also to control the action of the motor. This
      latter is supposed to work automatically and as a general thing does so
      with entire satisfaction, but there are times when the supply of gasolene
      must be regulated, and similar things done. Airship navigation calls for
      quick action, and for this reason the matter of control is an important
      one—it is more than important; it is vital.
    

      Several Methods of Control.
    

      Some aviators use a steering wheel somewhat after the style of that used
      in automobiles, and by this not only manipulate the rudder planes, but
      also the flow of gasolene. Others employ foot levers, and still others,
      like the Wrights, depend upon hand levers.
    

      Curtiss steers his aeroplane by means of a wheel, but secures the desired
      stabilizing effect with an ingenious jointed chair-back. This is so
      arranged that by leaning toward the high point of his wing planes the
      aeroplane is restored to an even keel. The steering post of the wheel is
      movable backward and forward, and by this motion elevation is obtained.
    

      The Wrights for some time used two hand levers, one to steer by and warp
      the flexible tips of the planes, the other to secure elevation. They have
      now consolidated all the functions in one lever. Bleriot also uses the
      single lever control.
    

      Farman employs a lever to actuate the rudders, but manipulates the
      balancing planes by foot levers.
    

      Santos-Dumont uses two hand levers with which to steer and elevate, but
      manipulates the planes by means of an attachment to the back of his outer
      coat.
    

      Connection With the Levers.
    

      No matter which particular method is employed, the connection between the
      levers and the object to be manipulated is almost invariably by wire. For
      instance, from the steering levers (or lever) two wires connect with
      opposite sides of the rudder. As a lever is moved so as to draw in the
      right-hand wire the rudder is drawn to the right and vice versa. The
      operation is exactly the same as in steering a boat. It is the same way in
      changing the position of the balancing planes. A movement of the hands or
      feet and the machine has changed its course, or, if the equilibrium is
      threatened, is back on an even keel.
    

      Simple as this seems it calls for a cool head, quick eye, and steady hand.
      The least hesitation or a false movement, and both aviator and craft are
      in danger.
    

      Which Method is Best?
    

      It would be a bold man who would attempt to pick out any one of these
      methods of control and say it was better than the others. As in other
      sections of aeroplane mechanism each method has its advocates who dwell
      learnedly upon its advantages, but the fact remains that all the various
      plans work well and give satisfaction.
    

      What the novice is interested in knowing is how the control is effected,
      and whether he has become proficient enough in his manipulation of it to
      be absolutely dependable in time of emergency. No amateur should attempt a
      flight alone, until he has thoroughly mastered the steering and plane
      control. If the services and advice of an experienced aviator are not to
      be had the novice should mount his machine on some suitable supports so it
      will be well clear of the ground, and, getting into the operator's seat,
      proceed to make himself well acquainted with the operation of the steering
      wheel and levers.
    

      Some Things to Be Learned.
    

      He will soon learn that certain movements of the steering gear produce
      certain effects on the rudders. If, for instance, his machine is equipped
      with a steering wheel, he will find that turning the wheel to the right
      turns the aeroplane in the same direction, because the tiller is brought
      around to the left. In the same way he will learn that a given movement of
      the lever throws the forward edge of the main plane upward, and that the
      machine, getting the impetus of the wind under the concave surfaces of the
      planes, will ascend. In the same way it will quickly become apparent to
      him that an opposite movement of the lever will produce an opposite effect—the
      forward edges of the planes will be lowered, the air will be "spilled" out
      to the rear, and the machine will descend.
    

      The time expended in these preliminary lessons will be well spent. It
      would be an act of folly to attempt to actually sail the craft without
      them.
    


 








      CHAPTER XII. HOW TO USE THE MACHINE.
    

      It is a mistaken idea that flying machines must be operated at extreme
      altitudes. True, under the impetus of handsome prizes, and the incentive
      to advance scientific knowledge, professional aviators have ascended to
      considerable heights, flights at from 500 to 1,500 feet being now common
      with such experts as Farman, Bleriot, Latham, Paulhan, Wright and Curtiss.
      The altitude record at this time is about 4,165 feet, held by Paulhan.
    

      One of the instructions given by experienced aviators to pupils, and for
      which they insist upon implicit obeyance, is: "If your machine gets more
      than 30 feet high, or comes closer to the ground than 6 feet, descend at
      once." Such men as Wright and Curtiss will not tolerate a violation of
      this rule. If their instructions are not strictly complied with they
      decline to give the offender further lessons.
    

      Why This Rule Prevails.
    

      There is good reason for this precaution. The higher the altitude the more
      rarefied (thinner) becomes the air, and the less sustaining power it has.
      Consequently the more difficult it becomes to keep in suspension a given
      weight. When sailing within 30 feet of the ground sustentation is
      comparatively easy and, should a fall occur, the results are not likely to
      be serious. On the other hand, sailing too near the ground is almost as
      objectionable in many ways as getting up too high. If the craft is
      navigated too close to the ground trees, shrubs, fences and other
      obstructions are liable to be encountered. There is also the handicap of
      contrary air currents diverted by the obstructions referred to, and which
      will be explained more fully further on.
    

      How to Make a Start.
    

      Taking it for granted that the beginner has familiarized himself with the
      manipulation of the machine, and especially the control mechanism, the
      next thing in order is an actual flight. It is probable that his machine
      will be equipped with a wheeled alighting gear, as the skids used by the
      Wrights necessitate the use of a special starting track. In this respect
      the wheeled machine is much easier to handle so far as novices are
      concerned as it may be easily rolled to the trial grounds. This, as in the
      case of the initial experiments, should be a clear, reasonably level
      place, free from trees, fences, rocks and similar obstructions with which
      there may be danger of colliding.
    

      The beginner will need the assistance of three men. One of these should
      take his position in the rear of the machine, and one at each end. On
      reaching the trial ground the aviator takes his seat in the machine and,
      while the men at the ends hold it steady the one in the rear assists in
      retaining it until the operator is ready. In the meantime the aviator has
      started his motor. Like the glider the flying machine, in order to
      accomplish the desired results, should be headed into the wind.
    

      When the Machine Rises.
    

      Under the impulse of the pushing movement, and assisted by the motor
      action, the machine will gradually rise from the ground—provided it
      has been properly proportioned and put together, and everything is in
      working order. This is the time when the aviator requires a cool head, At
      a modest distance from the ground use the control lever to bring the
      machine on a horizontal level and overcome the tendency to rise. The exact
      manipulation of this lever depends upon the method of control adopted, and
      with this the aviator is supposed to have thoroughly familiarized himself
      as previously advised in Chapter XI.
    

      It is at this juncture that the operator must act promptly, but with the
      perfect composure begotten of confidence. One of the great drawbacks in
      aviation by novices is the tendency to become rattled, and this is much
      more prevalent than one might suppose, even among men who, under other
      conditions, are cool and confident in their actions.
    

      There is something in the sensation of being suddenly lifted from the
      ground, and suspended in the air that is disconcerting at the start, but
      this will soon wear off if the experimenter will keep cool. A few
      successful flights no matter how short they may be, will put a lot of
      confidence into him.
    

      Make Your Flights Short.
    

      Be modest in your initial flights. Don't attempt to match the records of
      experienced men who have devoted years to mastering the details of
      aviation. Paulhan, Farman, Bleriot, Wright, Curtiss, and all the rest of
      them began, and practiced for years, in the manner here described, being
      content to make just a little advancement at each attempt. A flight of 150
      feet, cleanly and safely made, is better as a beginning than one of 400
      yards full of bungling mishaps.
    

      And yet these latter have their uses, provided the operator is of a
      discerning mind and can take advantage of them as object lessons. But, it
      is not well to invite them. They will occur frequently enough under the
      most favorable conditions, and it is best to have them come later when the
      feeling of trepidation and uncertainty as to what to do has worn off.
    

      Above all, don't attempt to fly too high. Keep within a reasonable
      distance from the ground—about 25 or 30 feet. This advice is not
      given solely to lessen the risk of serious accident in case of collapse,
      but mainly because it will assist to instill confidence in the operator.
    

      It is comparatively easy to learn to swim in shallow water, but the
      knowledge that one is tempting death in deep water begets timidity.
    

      Preserving the Equilibrium.
    

      After learning how to start and stop, to ascend and descend, the next
      thing to master is the art of preserving equilibrium, the knack of keeping
      the machine perfectly level in the air—on an "even keel," as a
      sailor would say. This simile is particularly appropriate as all aviators
      are in reality sailors, and much more daring ones than those who course
      the seas. The latter are in craft which are kept afloat by the buoyancy of
      the water, whether in motion or otherwise and, so long as normal
      conditions prevail, will not sink. Aviators sail the air in craft in which
      constant motion must be maintained in order to ensure flotation.
    

      The man who has ridden a bicycle or motorcycle around curves at anything
      like high speed, will have a very good idea as to the principle of
      maintaining equilibrium in an airship. He knows that in rounding curves
      rapidly there is a marked tendency to change the direction of the motion
      which will result in an upset unless he overcomes it by an inclination of
      his body in an opposite direction. This is why we see racers lean well
      over when taking the curves. It simply must be done to preserve the
      equilibrium and avoid a spill.
    

      How It Works In the Air.
    

      If the equilibrium of an airship is disturbed to an extent which
      completely overcomes the center of gravity it falls according to the
      location of the displacement. If this displacement, for instance, is at
      either end the apparatus falls endways; if it is to the front or rear, the
      fall is in the corresponding direction.
    

      Owing to uncertain air currents—the air is continually shifting and
      eddying, especially within a hundred feet or so of the earth—the
      equilibrium of an airship is almost constantly being disturbed to some
      extent. Even if this disturbance is not serious enough to bring on a fall
      it interferes with the progress of the machine, and should be overcome at
      once. This is one of the things connected with aerial navigation which
      calls for prompt, intelligent action.
    

      Frequently, when the displacement is very slight, it may be overcome, and
      the craft immediately righted by a mere shifting of the operator's body.
      Take, for illustration, a case in which the extreme right end of the
      machine becomes lowered a trifle from the normal level. It is possible to
      bring it back into proper position by leaning over to the left far enough
      to shift the weight to the counter-balancing point. The same holds good as
      to minor front or rear displacements.
    

      When Planes Must Be Used.
    

      There are other displacements, however, and these are the most frequent,
      which can be only overcome by manipulation of the stabilizing planes. The
      method of procedure depends upon the form of machine in use. The Wright
      machine, as previously explained, is equipped with plane ends which are so
      contrived as to admit of their being warped (position changed) by means of
      the lever control. These flexible tip planes move simultaneously, but in
      opposite directions. As those on one end rise, those on the other end fall
      below the level of the main plane. By this means air is displaced at one
      point, and an increased amount secured in another.
    

      This may seem like a complicated system, but its workings are simple when
      once understood. It is by the manipulation or warping of these flexible
      tips that transverse stability is maintained, and any tendency to
      displacement endways is overcome. Longitudinal stability is governed by
      means of the front rudder.
    

      Stabilizing planes of some form are a feature, and a necessary feature, on
      all flying machines, but the methods of application and manipulation vary
      according to the individual ideas of the inventors. They all tend,
      however, toward the same end—the keeping of the machine perfectly
      level when being navigated in the air.
    

      When to Make a Flight.
    

      A beginner should never attempt to make a flight when a strong wind is
      blowing. The fiercer the wind, the more likely it is to be gusty and
      uncertain, and the more difficult it will be to control the machine. Even
      the most experienced and daring of aviators find there is a limit to wind
      speed against which they dare not compete. This is not because they lack
      courage, but have the sense to realize that it would be silly and useless.
    

      The novice will find a comparatively still day, or one when the wind is
      blowing at not to exceed 15 miles an hour, the best for his experiments.
      The machine will be more easily controlled, the trip will be safer, and
      also cheaper as the consumption of fuel increases with the speed of the
      wind against which the aeroplane is forced.
    


 








      CHAPTER XIII. PECULIARITIES OF AIRSHIP POWER.
    

      As a general proposition it takes much more power to propel an airship a
      given number of miles in a certain time than it does an automobile
      carrying a far heavier load. Automobiles with a gross load of 4,000
      pounds, and equipped with engines of 30 horsepower, have travelled
      considerable distances at the rate of 50 miles an hour. This is an
      equivalent of about 134 pounds per horsepower. For an average modern
      flying machine, with a total load, machine and passengers, of 1,200
      pounds, and equipped with a 50-horsepower engine, 50 miles an hour is the
      maximum. Here we have the equivalent of exactly 24 pounds per horsepower.
      Why this great difference?
    

      No less an authority than Mr. Octave Chanute answers the question in a
      plain, easily understood manner. He says:
    

      "In the case of an automobile the ground furnishes a stable support; in
      the case of a flying machine the engine must furnish the support and also
      velocity by which the apparatus is sustained in the air."
    

      Pressure of the Wind.
    

      Air pressure is a big factor in the matter of aeroplane horsepower.
      Allowing that a dead calm exists, a body moving in the atmosphere creates
      more or less resistance. The faster it moves, the greater is this
      resistance. Moving at the rate of 60 miles an hour the resistance, or wind
      pressure, is approximately 50 pounds to the square foot of surface
      presented. If the moving object is advancing at a right angle to the wind
      the following table will give the horsepower effect of the resistance per
      square foot of surface at various speeds.
    

                            Horse Power
          Miles per Hour    per sq. foot
          10             0.013
          15             0 044
          20             0.105
          25             0.205
          30             0.354
          40             0.84
          50             1.64
          60             2.83
          80             6.72
          100            13.12


      While the pressure per square foot at 60 miles an hour, is only 1.64
      horsepower, at 100 miles, less than double the speed, it has increased to
      13.12 horsepower, or exactly eight times as much. In other words the
      pressure of the wind increases with the square of the velocity. Wind at 10
      miles an hour has four times more pressure than wind at 5 miles an hour.
    

      How to Determine Upon Power.
    

      This element of air resistance must be taken into consideration in
      determining the engine horsepower required. When the machine is under
      headway sufficient to raise it from the ground (about 20 miles an hour),
      each square foot of surface resistance, will require nearly nine-tenths of
      a horsepower to overcome the wind pressure, and propel the machine through
      the air. As shown in the table the ratio of power required increases
      rapidly as the speed increases until at 60 miles an hour approximately 3
      horsepower is needed.
    

      In a machine like the Curtiss the area of wind-exposed surface is about 15
      square feet. On the basis of this resistance moving the machine at 40
      miles an hour would require 12 horsepower. This computation covers only
      the machine's power to overcome resistance. It does not cover the power
      exerted in propelling the machine forward after the air pressure is
      overcome. To meet this important requirement Mr. Curtiss finds it
      necessary to use a 50-horsepower engine. Of this power, as has been
      already stated, 12 horsepower is consumed in meeting the wind pressure,
      leaving 38 horsepower for the purpose of making progress.
    

      The flying machine must move faster than the air to which it is opposed.
      Unless it does this there can be no direct progress. If the two forces are
      equal there is no straight-ahead advancement. Take, for sake of
      illustration, a case in which an aeroplane, which has developed a speed of
      30 miles an hour, meets a wind velocity of equal force moving in an
      opposite direction. What is the result? There can be no advance because it
      is a contest between two evenly matched forces. The aeroplane stands
      still. The only way to get out of the difficulty is for the operator to
      wait for more favorable conditions, or bring his machine to the ground in
      the usual manner by manipulation of the control system.
    

      Take another case. An aeroplane, capable of making 50 miles an hour in a
      calm, is met by a head wind of 25 miles an hour. How much progress does
      the aeroplane make? Obviously it is 25 miles an hour over the ground.
    

      Put the proposition in still another way. If the wind is blowing harder
      than it is possible for the engine power to overcome, the machine will be
      forced backward.
    

      Wind Pressure a Necessity.
    

      While all this is true, the fact remains that wind pressure, up to a
      certain stage, is an absolute necessity in aerial navigation. The
      atmosphere itself has very little real supporting power, especially if
      inactive. If a body heavier than air is to remain afloat it must move
      rapidly while in suspension.
    

      One of the best illustrations of this is to be found in skating over thin
      ice. Every school boy knows that if he moves with speed he may skate or
      glide in safety across a thin sheet of ice that would not begin to bear
      his weight if he were standing still. Exactly the same proposition obtains
      in the case of the flying machine.
    

      The non-technical reason why the support of the machine becomes easier as
      the speed increases is that the sustaining power of the atmosphere
      increases with the resistance, and the speed with which the object is
      moving increases this resistance. With a velocity of 12 miles an hour the
      weight of the machine is practically reduced by 230 pounds. Thus, if under
      a condition of absolute calm it were possible to sustain a weight of 770
      pounds, the same atmosphere would sustain a weight of 1,000 pounds moving
      at a speed of 12 miles an hour. This sustaining power increases rapidly as
      the speed increases. While at 12 miles the sustaining power is figured at
      230 pounds, at 24 miles it is four times as great, or 920 pounds.
    

      Supporting Area of Birds.
    

      One of the things which all producing aviators seek to copy is the motive
      power of birds, particularly in their relation to the area of support.
      Close investigation has established the fact that the larger the bird the
      less is the relative area of support required to secure a given result.
      This is shown in the following table:
    

                                                   Supporting
                  Weight       Surface       Horse      area
     Bird         in lbs.     in sq. feet   power     per lb.
     Pigeon         1.00      0.7           0.012     0.7
     Wild Goose     9.00      2.65          0.026     0.2833
     Buzzard        5.00      5.03          0.015     1.06
     Condor        17.00      9.85          0.043     0.57


      So far as known the condor is the largest of modern birds. It has a wing
      stretch of 10 feet from tip to tip, a supporting area of about 10 square
      feet, and weighs 17 pounds. It. is capable of exerting perhaps 1-30
      horsepower. (These figures are, of course, approximate.) Comparing the
      condor with the buzzard with a wing stretch of 6 feet, supporting area of
      5 square feet, and a little over 1-100 horsepower, it may be seen that,
      broadly speaking, the larger the bird the less surface area (relatively)
      is needed for its support in the air.
    

      Comparison With Aeroplanes.
    

      If we compare the bird figures with those made possible by the development
      of the aeroplane it will be readily seen that man has made a wonderful
      advance in imitating the results produced by nature. Here are the figures:
    

                                                       Supporting
                     Weight      Surface       Horse      area
     Machine         in lbs.    in sq. feet    power     per lb.
     Santos-Dumont..  350      110.00        30        0.314
     Bleriot.....     700      150.00        25        0.214
     Antoinette.... 1,200      538.00        50        0.448
     Curtiss.....     700      258.00        60        0.368
     Wright.....4 1,100      538.00        25        0.489
     Farman......   1,200      430.00        50        0.358
     Voisin......   1,200      538.00        50        0.448


      While the average supporting surface is in favor of the aeroplane, this is
      more than overbalanced by the greater amount of horsepower required for
      the weight lifted. The average supporting surface in birds is about
      three-quarters of a square foot per pound. In the average aeroplane it is
      about one-half square foot per pound. On the other hand the average
      aeroplane has a lifting capacity of 24 pounds per horsepower, while the
      buzzard, for instance, lifts 5 pounds with 15-100 of a horsepower. If the
      Wright machine—which has a lifting power of 50 pounds per horsepower—should
      be alone considered the showing would be much more favorable to the
      aeroplane, but it would not be a fair comparison.
    

      More Surface, Less Power.
    

      Broadly speaking, the larger the supporting area the less will be the
      power required. Wright, by the use of 538 square feet of supporting
      surface, gets along with an engine of 25 horsepower. Curtiss, who uses
      only 258 square feet of surface, finds an engine of 50 horsepower is
      needed. Other things, such as frame, etc., being equal, it stands to
      reason that a reduction in the area of supporting surface will
      correspondingly reduce the weight of the machine. Thus we have the Curtiss
      machine with its 258 square feet of surface, weighing only 600 pounds
      (without operator), but requiring double the horsepower of the Wright
      machine with 538 square feet of surface and weighing 1,100 pounds. This
      demonstrates in a forceful way the proposition that the larger the surface
      the less power will be needed.
    

      But there is a limit, on account of its bulk and awkwardness in handling,
      beyond which the surface area cannot be enlarged. Otherwise it might be
      possible to equip and operate aeroplanes satisfactorily with engines of 15
      horsepower, or even less.
    

      The Fuel Consumption Problem.
    

      Fuel consumption is a prime factor in the production of engine power. The
      veriest mechanical tyro knows in a general way that the more power is
      secured the more fuel must be consumed, allowing that there is no
      difference in the power-producing qualities of the material used. But few
      of us understand just what the ratio of increase is, or how it is caused.
      This proposition is one of keen interest in connection with aviation.
    

      Let us cite a problem which will illustrate the point quoted: Allowing
      that it takes a given amount of gasolene to propel a flying machine a
      given distance, half the way with the wind, and half against it, the wind
      blowing at one-half the speed of the machine, what will be the increase in
      fuel consumption?
    

      Increase of Thirty Per Cent.
    

      On the face of it there would seem to be no call for an increase as the
      resistance met when going against the wind is apparently offset by the
      propulsive force of the wind when the machine is travelling with it. This,
      however, is called faulty reasoning. The increase in fuel consumption, as
      figured by Mr. F. W. Lanchester, of the Royal Society of Arts, will be
      fully 30 per cent over the amount required for a similar operation of the
      machine in still air. If the journey should be made at right angles to the
      wind under the same conditions the increase would be 15 per cent.
    

      In other words Mr. Lanchester maintains that the work done by the motor in
      making headway against the wind for a certain distance calls for more
      engine energy, and consequently more fuel by 30 per cent, than is saved by
      the helping force of the wind on the return journey.
    


 








      CHAPTER XIV. ABOUT WIND CURRENTS, ETC.
    

      One of the first difficulties which the novice will encounter is the
      uncertainty of the wind currents. With a low velocity the wind, some
      distance away from the ground, is ordinarily steady. As the velocity
      increases, however, the wind generally becomes gusty and fitful in its
      action. This, it should be remembered, does not refer to the velocity of
      the machine, but to that of the air itself.
    

      In this connection Mr. Arthur T. Atherholt, president of the Aero Club of
      Pennsylvania, in addressing the Boston Society of Scientific Research,
      said:
    

      "Probably the whirlpools of Niagara contain no more erratic currents than
      the strata of air which is now immediately above us, a fact hard to
      realize on account of its invisibility."
    

      Changes In Wind Currents.
    

      While Mr. Atherholt's experience has been mainly with balloons it is all
      the more valuable on this account, as the balloons were at the mercy of
      the wind and their varying directions afforded an indisputable guide as to
      the changing course of the air currents. In speaking of this he said:
    

      "In the many trips taken, varying in distance traversed from twenty-five
      to 900 miles, it was never possible except in one instance to maintain a
      straight course. These uncertain currents were most noticeable in the
      Gordon-Bennett race from St. Louis in 1907. Of the nine aerostats
      competing in that event, eight covered a more or less direct course due
      east and southeast, whereas the writer, with Major Henry B. Hersey, first
      started northwest, then north, northeast, east, east by south, and when
      over the center of Lake Erie were again blown northwest notwithstanding
      that more favorable winds were sought for at altitudes varying from 100 to
      3,000 meters, necessitating a finish in Canada nearly northeast of the
      starting point.
    

      "These nine balloons, making landings extending from Lake Ontario, Canada,
      to Virginia, all started from one point within the same hour.
    

      "The single exception to these roving currents occurred on October 21st,
      of last year (1909) when, starting from Philadelphia, the wind shifted
      more than eight degrees, the greatest variation being at the lowest
      altitudes, yet at no time was a height of over a mile reached.
    

      "Throughout the entire day the sky was overcast, with a thermometer
      varying from fifty-seven degrees at 300 feet to forty-four degrees,
      Fahrenheit at 5,000 feet, at which altitude the wind had a velocity of 43
      miles an hour, in clouds of a cirro-cumulus nature, a landing finally
      being made near Tannersville, New York, in the Catskill mountains, after a
      voyage of five and one-half hours.
    

      "I have no knowledge of a recorded trip of this distance and duration,
      maintained in practically a straight line from start to finish."
    

      This wind disturbance is more noticeable and more difficult to contend
      with in a balloon than in a flying machine, owing to the bulk and unwieldy
      character of the former. At the same time it is not conducive to pleasant,
      safe or satisfactory sky-sailing in an aeroplane. This is not stated with
      the purpose of discouraging aviation, but merely that the operator may
      know what to expect and be prepared to meet it.
    

      Not only does the wind change its horizontal course abruptly and without
      notice, but it also shifts in a vertical direction, one second blowing up,
      and another down. No man has as yet fathomed the why and wherefore of this
      erratic action; it is only known that it exists.
    

      The most stable currents will be found from 50 to 100 feet from the earth,
      provided the wind is not diverted by such objects as trees, rocks, etc.
      That there are equally stable currents higher up is true, but they are
      generally to be found at excessive altitudes.
    

      How a Bird Meets Currents.
    

      Observe a bird in action on a windy day and you will find it continually
      changing the position of its wings. This is done to meet the varying gusts
      and eddies of the air so that sustentation may be maintained and headway
      made. One second the bird is bending its wings, altering the angle of
      incidence; the next it is lifting or depressing one wing at a time. Still
      again it will extend one wing tip in advance of the other, or be spreading
      or folding, lowering or raising its tail.
    

      All these motions have a meaning, a purpose. They assist the bird in
      preserving its equilibrium. Without them the bird would be just as
      helpless in the air as a human being and could not remain afloat.
    

      When the wind is still, or comparatively so, a bird, having secured the
      desired altitude by flight at an angle, may sail or soar with no wing
      action beyond an occasional stroke when it desires to advance. But, in a
      gusty, uncertain wind it must use its wings or alight somewhere.
    

      Trying to Imitate the Bird.
    

      Writing in Fly, Mr. William E. White says:
    

      "The bird's flight suggests a number of ways in which the equilibrium of a
      mechanical bird may be controlled. Each of these methods of control may be
      effected by several different forms of mechanism.
    

      "Placing the two wings of an aeroplane at an angle of three to five
      degrees to each other is perhaps the oldest way of securing lateral
      balance. This way readily occurs to anyone who watches a sea gull soaring.
      The theory of the dihedral angle is that when one wing is lifted by a gust
      of wind, the air is spilled from under it; while the other wing, being
      correspondingly depressed, presents a greater resistance to the gust and
      is lifted restoring the balance. A fixed angle of three to five degrees,
      however, will only be sufficient for very light puffs of wind and to mount
      the wings so that the whole wing may be moved to change the dihedral angle
      presents mechanical difficulties which would be better avoided.
    

      "The objection of mechanical impracticability applies to any plan to
      preserve the balance by shifting weight or ballast. The center of gravity
      should be lower than the center of the supporting surfaces, but cannot be
      made much lower. It is a common mistake to assume that complete stability
      will be secured by hanging the center of gravity very low on the principle
      of the parachute. An aeroplane depends upon rapid horizontal motion for
      its support, and if the center of gravity be far below the center of
      support, every change of speed or wind pressure will cause the machine to
      turn about its center of gravity, pitching forward and backward
      dangerously.
    

      Preserving Longitudinal Balance.
    

      "The birds maintain longitudinal, or fore and aft balance, by elevating or
      depressing their tails. Whether this action is secured in an aeroplane by
      means of a horizontal rudder placed in the rear, or by deflecting planes
      placed in front of the main planes, the principle is evidently the same. A
      horizontal rudder placed well to the rear as in the Antoinette, Bleriot or
      Santos-Dumont monoplanes, will be very much safer and steadier than the
      deflecting planes in front, as in the Wright or Curtiss biplanes, but not
      so sensitive or prompt in action.
    

      "The natural fore and aft stability is very much strengthened by placing
      the load well forward. The center of gravity near the front and a tail or
      rudder streaming to the rear secures stability as an arrow is balanced by
      the head and feathering. The adoption of this principle makes it almost
      impossible for the aeroplane to turn over.
    

      The Matter of Lateral Balance.
    

      "All successful aeroplanes thus far have maintained lateral balance by the
      principle of changing the angle of incidence of the wings.
    

      "Other ways of maintaining the lateral balance, suggested by observation
      of the flight of birds are—extending the wing tips and spilling the
      air through the pinions; or, what is the same thing, varying the area of
      the wings at their extremities.
    

      "Extending the wing tips seems to be a simple and effective solution of
      the problem. The tips may be made to swing outward upon a vertical axis
      placed at the front edge of the main planes; or they may be hinged to the
      ends of the main plane so as to be elevated or depressed through suitable
      connections by the aviator; or they may be supported from a horizontal
      axis parallel with the ends of the main planes so that they may swing
      outward, the aviator controlling both tips through one lever so that as
      one tip is extended the other is retracted.
    

      "The elastic wing pinions of a bird bend easily before the wind,
      permitting the gusts to glance off, but presenting always an even and
      efficient curvature to the steady currents of the air."
    

      High Winds Threaten Stability.
    

      To ensure perfect stability, without control, either human or automatic,
      it is asserted that the aeroplane must move faster than the wind is
      blowing. So long as the wind is blowing at the rate of 30 miles an hour,
      and the machine is traveling 40 or more, there will be little trouble as
      regards equilibrium so far as wind disturbance goes, provided the wind
      blows evenly and does not come in gusts or eddying currents. But when
      conditions are reversed—when the machine travels only 30 miles an
      hour and the wind blows at the rate of 50, look out for loss of
      equilibrium.
    

      One of the main reasons for this is that high winds are rarely steady;
      they seldom blow for any length of time at the same speed. They are
      usually "gusty," the gusts being a momentary movement at a higher speed.
      Tornadic gusts are also formed by the meeting of two opposing currents,
      causing a whirling motion, which makes stability uncertain. Besides, it is
      not unusual for wind of high speed to suddenly change its direction
      without warning.
    

      Trouble With Vertical Columns.
    

      Vertical currents—columns of ascending air—are frequently
      encountered in unexpected places and have more or less tendency, according
      to their strength, to make it difficult to keep the machine within a
      reasonable distance from the ground.
    

      These vertical currents are most generally noticeable in the vicinity of
      steep cliffs, or deep ravines. In such instances they are usually of
      considerable strength, being caused by the deflection of strong winds
      blowing against the face of the cliffs. This deflection exerts a back
      pressure which is felt quite a distance away from the point of origin, so
      that the vertical current exerts an influence in forcing the machine
      upward long before the cliff is reached.
    


 








      CHAPTER XV. THE ELEMENT OF DANGER.
    

      That there is an element of danger in aviation is undeniable, but it is
      nowhere so great as the public imagines. Men are killed and injured in the
      operation of flying machines just as they are killed and injured in the
      operation of railways. Considering the character of aviation the
      percentage of casualties is surprisingly small.
    

      This is because the results following a collapse in the air are very much
      different from what might be imagined. Instead of dropping to the ground
      like a bullet an aeroplane, under ordinary conditions will, when anything
      goes wrong, sail gently downward like a parachute, particularly if the
      operator is cool-headed and nervy enough to so manipulate the apparatus as
      to preserve its equilibrium and keep the machine on an even keel.
    

      Two Fields of Safety.
    

      At least one prominent aviator has declared that there are two fields of
      safety—one close to the ground, and the other well up in the air. In
      the first-named the fall will be a slight one with little chance of the
      operator being seriously hurt. From the field of high altitude the the
      descent will be gradual, as a rule, the planes of the machine serving to
      break the force of the fall. With a cool-headed operator in control the
      aeroplane may be even guided at an angle (about 1 to 8) in its descent so
      as to touch the ground with a gliding motion and with a minimum of impact.
    

      Such an experience, of course, is far from pleasant, but it is by no means
      so dangerous as might appear. There is more real danger in falling from an
      elevation of 75 or 100 feet than there is from 1,000 feet, as in the
      former case there is no chance for the machine to serve as a parachute—its
      contact with the ground comes too quickly.
    

      Lesson in Recent Accidents.
    

      Among the more recent fatalities in aviation are the deaths of Antonio
      Fernandez and Leon Delagrange. The former was thrown to the ground by a
      sudden stoppage of his motor, the entire machine seeming to collapse. It
      is evident there were radical defects, not only in the motor, but in the
      aeroplane framework as well. At the time of the stoppage it is estimated
      that Fernandez was up about 1,500 feet, but the machine got no opportunity
      to exert a parachute effect, as it broke up immediately. This would
      indicate a fatal weakness in the structure which, under proper testing,
      could probably have been detected before it was used in flight.
    

      It is hard to say it, but Delagrange appears to have been culpable to
      great degree in overloading his machine with a motor equipment much
      heavier than it was designed to sustain. He was 65 feet up in the air when
      the collapse occurred, resulting in his death. As in the case of Fernandez
      common-sense precaution would doubtless have prevented the fatality.
    

      Aviation Not Extra Hazardous.
    

      All told there have been, up to the time of this writing (April, 1910),
      just five fatalities in the history of power-driven aviation. This is
      surprisingly low when the nature of the experiments, and the fact that
      most of the operators were far from having extended experience, is taken
      into consideration. Men like the Wrights, Curtiss, Bleriot, Farman,
      Paulhan and others, are now experts, but there was a time, and it was not
      long ago, when they were unskilled. That they, with numerous others less
      widely known, should have come safely through their many experiments would
      seem to disprove the prevailing idea that aviation is an extra hazardous
      pursuit.
    

      In the hands of careful, quick-witted, nervy men the sailing of an airship
      should be no more hazardous than the sailing of a yacht. A vessel captain
      with common sense will not go to sea in a storm, or navigate a weak,
      unseaworthy craft. Neither should an aviator attempt to sail when the wind
      is high and gusty, nor with a machine which has not been thoroughly tested
      and found to be strong and safe.
    

      Safer Than Railroading.
    

      Statistics show that some 12,000 people are killed and 72,000 injured
      every year on the railroads of the United States. Come to think it over it
      is small wonder that the list of fatalities is so large. Trains are run at
      high speeds, dashing over crossings at which collisions are liable to
      occur, and over bridges which often collapse or are swept away by floods.
      Still, while the number of casualties is large, the actual percentage is
      small considering the immense number of people involved.
    

      It is so in aviation. The number of casualties is remarkably small in
      comparison with the number of flights made. In the hands of competent men
      the sailing of an airship should be, and is, freer from risk of accident
      than the running of a railway train. There are no rails to spread or
      break, no bridges to collapse, no crossings at which collisions may occur,
      no chance for some sleepy or overworked employee to misunderstand the
      dispatcher's orders and cause a wreck.
    

      Two Main Causes of Trouble.
    

      The two main causes of trouble in an airship leading to disaster may be
      attributed to the stoppage of the motor, and the aviator becoming rattled
      so that he loses control of his machine. Modern ingenuity is fast
      developing motors that almost daily become more and more reliable, and
      experience is making aviators more and more self-confident in their
      ability to act wisely and promptly in cases of emergency. Besides this a
      satisfactory system of automatic control is in a fair way of being
      perfected.
    

      Occasionally even the most experienced and competent of men in all
      callings become careless and by foolish action invite disaster. This is
      true of aviators the same as it is of railroaders, men who work in
      dynamite mills, etc. But in nearly every instance the responsibility rests
      with the individual; not with the system. There are some men unfitted by
      nature for aviation, just as there are others unfitted to be railway
      engineers.
    


 








      CHAPTER XVI. RADICAL CHANGES BEING MADE.
    

      Changes, many of them extremely radical in their nature, are continually
      being made by prominent aviators, and particularly those who have won the
      greatest amount of success. Wonderful as the results have been few of the
      aviators are really satisfied. Their successes have merely spurred them on
      to new endeavors, the ultimate end being the development of an absolutely
      perfect aircraft.
    

      Among the men who have been thus experimenting are the Wright Brothers,
      who last year (1909) brought out a craft totally different as regards
      proportions and weight from the one used the preceding year. One marked
      result was a gain of about 3 1/2 miles an hour in speed.
    

      Dimensions of 1908 Machine.
    

      The 1908 model aeroplane was 40 by 29 feet over all. The carrying
      surfaces, that is, the two aerocurves, were 40 by 6 feet, having a
      parabolical curve of one in twelve. With about 70 square feet of surface
      in the rudders, the total surface given was about 550 square feet. The
      engine, which is the invention of the Wright brothers, weighed,
      approximately, 200 pounds, and gave about 25 horsepower at 1,400
      revolutions per minute. The total weight of the aeroplane, exclusive of
      passenger, but inclusive of engine, was about 1,150 pounds. This result
      showed a lift of a fraction over 2 1/4 pounds to the square foot of
      carrying surface. The speed desired was 40 miles an hour, but the machine
      was found to make only a scant 39 miles an hour. The upright struts were
      about 7/8-inch thick, the skids, 2 1/2 by 1 1/4 inches thick.
    

      Dimensions of 1909 Machine.
    

      The 1909 aeroplane was built primarily for greater speed, and relatively
      heavier; to be less at the mercy of the wind. This result was obtained as
      follows: The aerocurves, or carrying surfaces, were reduced in dimensions
      from 40 by 6 feet to 36 by 5 1/2 feet, the curve remaining the same, one
      in twelve. The upright struts were cut from seven-eighths inch to
      five-eighths inch, and the skids from two and one-half by one and
      one-quarter to two and one-quarter by one and three-eighths inches. This
      result shows that there were some 81 square feet of carrying surface
      missing over that of last year's model. and some 25 pounds loss of weight.
      Relatively, though, the 1909 model aeroplane, while actually 25 pounds
      lighter, is really some 150 pounds heavier in the air than the 1908 model,
      owing to the lesser square feet of carrying surface.
    

      Some of the Results Obtained.
    

      Reducing the carrying surfaces from 6 to 5 1/2 feet gave two results—first,
      less carrying capacity; and, second, less head-on resistance, owing to the
      fact that the extent of the parabolic curve in the carrying surfaces was
      shortened. The "head-on" resistance is the retardance the aeroplane meets
      in passing through the air, and is counted in square feet. In the 1908
      model the curve being one in twelve and 6 feet deep, gave 6 inches of
      head-on resistance. The plane being 40 feet spread, gave 6 inches by 40
      feet, or 20 square feet of head-on resistance. Increasing this figure by a
      like amount for each plane, and adding approximately 10 square feet for
      struts, skids and wiring, we have a total of approximately, 50 square feet
      of surface for "head-on" resistance.
    

      In the 1909 aeroplane, shortening the curve 6 inches at the parabolic end
      of the curve took off 1 inch of head-on resistance. Shortening the spread
      of the planes took off between 3 and 4 square feet of head-on resistance.
      Add to this the total of 7 square feet, less curve surface and about 1
      square foot, less wire and woodwork resistance, and we have a grand total
      of, approximately, 12 square feet of less "head-on" resistance over the
      1908 model.
    

      Changes in Engine Action.
    

      The engine used in 1909 was the same one used in 1908, though some minor
      changes were made as improvements; for instance, a make and break spark
      was used, and a nine-tooth, instead of a ten-tooth magneto gear-wheel was
      used. This increased the engine revolutions per minute from 1,200 to
      1,400, and the propeller revolutions per minute from 350 to 371, giving a
      propeller thrust of, approximately, 170 foot pounds instead of 153, as was
      had last year.
    

      More Speed and Same Capacity.
    

      One unsatisfactory feature of the 1909 model over that of 1908,
      apparently, was the lack of inherent lateral stability. This was caused by
      the lesser surface and lesser extent of curvatures at the portions of the
      aeroplane which were warped. This defect did not show so plainly after Mr.
      Orville Wright had become fully proficient in the handling of the new
      machine, and with skillful management, the 1909 model aeroplane will be
      just as safe and secure as the other though it will take a little more
      practice to get that same degree of skill.
    

      To sum up: The aeroplane used in 1909 was 25 pounds lighter, but really
      about 150 pounds heavier in the air, had less head-on resistance, and
      greater propeller thrust. The speed was increased from about 39 miles per
      hour to 42 1/2 miles per hour. The lifting capacity remained about the
      same, about 450 pounds capacity passenger-weight, with the 1908 machine.
      In this respect, the loss of carrying surface was compensated for by the
      increased speed.
    

      During the first few flights it was plainly demonstrated that it would
      need the highest skill to properly handle the aeroplane, as first one end
      and then the other would dip and strike the ground, and either tear the
      canvas or slew the aeroplane around and break a skid.
    

      Wrights Adopt Wheeled Gears.
    

      In still another important respect the Wrights, so far as the output of
      one of their companies goes, have made a radical change. All the
      aeroplanes turned out by the Deutsch Wright Gesellschaft, according to the
      German publication, Automobil-Welt, will hereafter be equipped with
      wheeled running gears and tails. The plan of this new machine is shown in
      the illustration on page 145. The wheels are three in number, and are
      attached one to each of the two skids, just under the front edge of the
      planes, and one forward of these, attached to a cross-member. It is
      asserted that with these wheels the teaching of purchasers to operate the
      machines is much simplified, as the beginners can make short flights on
      their own account without using the starting derrick.
    

      This is a big concession for the Wrights to make, as they have hitherto
      adhered stoutly to the skid gear. While it is true they do not control the
      German company producing their aeroplanes, yet the nature of their
      connection with the enterprise is such that it may be taken for granted no
      radical changes in construction would be made without their approval and
      consent.
    

      Only Three Dangerous Rivals.
    

      Official trials with the 1909 model smashed many records and leave the
      Wright brothers with only three dangerous rivals in the field, and with
      basic patents which cover the curve, warp and wing-tip devices found on
      all the other makes of aeroplanes. These three rivals are the Curtiss and
      Voisin biplane type and the Bleriot monoplane pattern.
    

      The Bleriot monoplane is probably the most dangerous rival, as this make
      of machine has a record of 54 miles per hour, has crossed the English
      channel, and has lifted two passengers besides the operator. The latest
      type of this machine only weighs 771.61 pounds complete, without
      passengers, and will lift a total passenger weight of 462.97 pounds, which
      is a lift of 5.21 pounds to the square foot. This is a better result than
      those published by the Wright brothers, the best noted being 4.25 pounds
      per square foot.
    

      Other Aviators at Work.
    

      The Wrights, however, are not alone in their efforts to promote the
      efficiency of the flying machine. Other competent inventive aviators,
      notably Curtiss, Voisin, Bleriot and Farman, are close after them. The
      Wrights, as stated, have a marked advantage in the possession of patents
      covering surface plane devices which have thus far been found
      indispensable in flying machine construction. Numerous law suits growing
      out of alleged infringements of these patents have been started, and
      others are threatened. What effect these actions will have in deterring
      aviators in general from proceeding with their experiments remains to be
      seen.
    

      In the meantime the four men named—Curtiss, Voisin, Bleriot and
      Farman—are going ahead regardless of consequences, and the inventive
      genius of each is so strong that it is reasonable to expect some
      remarkable developments in the near future.
    

      Smallest of Flying Machines.
    

      To Santos Dumont must be given the credit of producing the smallest
      practical flying machine yet constructed. True, he has done nothing
      remarkable with it in the line of speed, but he has demonstrated the fact
      that a large supporting surface is not an essential feature.
    

      This machine is named "La Demoiselle." It is a monoplane of the dihedral
      type, with a main plane on each side of the center. These main planes are
      of 18 foot spread, and nearly 6 1/2 feet in depth, giving approximately
      115 feet of surface area. The total weight is 242 pounds, which is 358
      pounds less than any other machine which has been successfully used. The
      total depth from front to rear is 26 feet.
    

      The framework is of bamboo, strengthened and held taut with wire guys.
    

      Have One Rule in Mind.
    

      In this struggle for mastery in flying machine efficiency all the
      contestants keep one rule in mind, and this is:
    

      "The carrying capacity of an aeroplane is governed by the peripheral curve
      of its carrying surfaces, plus the speed; and the speed is governed by the
      thrust of the propellers, less the 'head-on' resistance."
    

      Their ideas as to the proper means of approaching the proposition may, and
      undoubtedly are, at variance, but the one rule in solving the problem of
      obtaining the greatest carrying capacity combined with the greatest speed,
      obtains in all instances.
    


 








      CHAPTER XVII. SOME OF THE NEW DESIGNS.
    

      Spurred on by the success attained by the more experienced and better
      known aviators numerous inventors of lesser fame are almost daily
      producing practical flying machines varying radically in construction from
      those now in general use.
    

      One of these comparatively new designs is the Van Anden biplane, made by
      Frank Van Anden of Islip, Long Island, a member of the New York Aeronautic
      Society. While his machine is wholly experimental, many successful short
      flights were made with it last fall (1909). One flight, made October 19th,
      1909, is of particular interest as showing the practicability of an
      automatic stabilizing device installed by the inventor. The machine was
      caught in a sudden severe gust of wind and keeled over, but almost
      immediately righted itself, thus demonstrating in a most satisfactory
      manner the value of one new attachment.
    

      Features of Van Anden Model.
    

      In size the surfaces of the main biplane are 26 feet in spread, and 4 feet
      in depth from front to rear. The upper and lower planes are 4 feet apart.
      Silkolene coated with varnish is used for the coverings. Ribs (spruce) are
      curved one inch to the foot, the deepest part of the curve (4 inches)
      being one foot back from the front edge of the horizontal beam. Struts
      (also of spruce, as is all the framework) are elliptical in shape. The
      main beams are in three sections, nearly half round in form, and joined by
      metal sleeves.
    

      There is a two-surface horizontal rudder, 2x2x4 feet, in front. This is
      pivoted at its lateral center 8 feet from the front edge of the main
      planes. In the rear is another two-surface horizontal rudder 2x2x2 1/2
      feet, pivoted in the same manner as the front one, 15 feet from the rear
      edges of the main planes.
    

      Hinged to the rear central strut of the rear rudder is a vertical rudder 2
      feet high by 3 feet in length.
    

      The Method of Control.
    

      In the operation of these rudders—both front and rear—and the
      elevation and depression of the main planes, the Curtiss system is
      employed. Pushing the steering-wheel post outward depresses the front
      edges of the planes, and brings the machine downward; pulling the
      steering-wheel post inward elevates the front edges of the planes and
      causes the machine to ascend.
    

      Turning the steering wheel itself to the right swings the tail rudder to
      the left, and the machine, obeying this like a boat, turns in the same
      direction as the wheel is turned. By like cause turning the wheel to the
      left turns the machine to the left.
    

      Automatic Control of Wings.
    

      There are two wing tips, each of 6 feet spread (length) and 2 feet from
      front to rear. These are hinged half way between the main surfaces to the
      two outermost rear struts. Cables run from these to an automatic device
      working with power from the engine, which automatically operates the tips
      with the tilting of the machine. Normally the wing tips are held
      horizontal by stiff springs introduced in the cables outside of the
      device.
    

      It was the successful working of this device which righted the Van Anden
      craft when it was overturned in the squall of October 19th, 1909. Previous
      to that occurrence Mr. Van Anden had looked upon the device as purely
      experimental, and had admitted that he had grave uncertainty as to how it
      would operate in time of emergency. He is now quoted as being thoroughly
      satisfied with its practicability. It is this automatic device which gives
      the Van Anden machine at least one distinctively new feature.
    

      While on this subject it will not be amiss to add that Mr. Curtiss does
      not look kindly on automatic control. "I would rather trust to my own
      action than that of a machine," he says. This is undoubtedly good logic so
      far as Mr. Curtiss is concerned, but all aviators are not so cool-headed
      and resourceful.
    

      Motive Power of Van Anden.
    

      A 50-horsepower "H-F" water cooled motor drives a laminated wood propeller
      6 feet in diameter, with a 17 degree pitch at the extremities, increasing
      toward the hub. The rear end of the motor is about 6 inches back from the
      rear transverse beam and the engine shaft is in a direct line with the
      axes of the two horizontal rudders. An R. I. V. ball bearing carries the
      shaft at this point. Flying, the motor turns at about 800 revolutions per
      minute, delivering 180 pounds pull. A test of the motor running at 1,200
      showed a pull of 250 pounds on the scales.
    

      Still Another New Aeroplane.
    

      Another new aeroplane is that produced by A. M. Herring (an old-timer) and
      W. S. Burgess, under the name of the Herring-Burgess. This is also
      equipped with an automatic stability device for maintaining the balance
      transversely. The curvature of the planes is also laid out on new lines.
      That this new plan is effective is evidenced by the fact that the machine
      has been elevated to an altitude of 40 feet by using one-half the power of
      the 30-horsepower motor.
    

      The system of rudder and elevation control is very simple. The aviator
      sits in front of the lower plane, and extending his arms, grasps two
      supports which extend down diagonally in front. On the under side of these
      supports just beneath his fingers are the controls which operate the
      vertical rudder, in the rear. Thus, if he wishes to turn to the right, he
      presses the control under the fingers of his right hand; if to the left,
      that under the fingers of his left hand. The elevating rudder is operated
      by the aviator's right foot, the control being placed on a foot-rest.
    

      Motor Is Extremely Light.
    

      Not the least notable feature of the craft is its motor. Although
      developing, under load, 30-horsepower, or that of an ordinary automobile,
      it weighs, complete, hardly 100 pounds. Having occasion to move it a
      little distance for inspection, Mr. Burgess picked it up and walked off
      with it—cylinders, pistons, crankcase and all, even the magneto,
      being attached. There are not many 30-horsepower engines which can be so
      handled. Everything about it is reduced to its lowest terms of simplicity,
      and hence, of weight. A single camshaft operates not only all of the inlet
      and exhaust valves, but the magneto and gear water pump, as well. The
      motor is placed directly behind the operator, and the propeller is
      directly mounted on the crankshaft.
    

      This weight of less than 100 pounds, it must be remembered, is not for the
      motor alone; it includes the entire power plant equipment.
    

      The "thrust" of the propeller is also extraordinary, being between 250 and
      260 pounds. The force of the wind displacement is strong enough to knock
      down a good-sized boy as one youngster ascertained when he got behind the
      propeller as it was being tested. He was not only knocked down but driven
      for some distance away from the machine. The propeller has four blades
      which are but little wider than a lath.
    

      Machine Built by Students.
    

      Students at the University of Pennsylvania, headed by Laurence J. Lesh, a
      protege of Octave Chanute, have constructed a practical aeroplane of
      ordinary maximum size, in which is incorporated many new ideas. The most
      unique of these is to be found in the steering gear, and the provision
      made for the accommodation of a pupil while taking lessons under an
      experienced aviator.
    

      Immediately back of the aviator is an extra seat and an extra steering
      wheel which works in tandem style with the front wheel. By this
      arrangement a beginner may be easily and quickly taught to have perfect
      control of the machine. These tandem wheels are also handy for passengers
      who may wish to operate the car independently of one another, it being
      understood, of course, that there will be no conflict of action.
    

      Frame Size and Engine Power.
    

      The frame has 36 feet spread and measures 35 feet from the front edge to
      the end of the tail in the rear. It is equipped with two rear propellers
      operated by a Ramsey 8-cylinder motor of 50 horsepower, placed
      horizontally across the lower plane, with the crank shaft running clear
      through the engine.
    

      The "Pennsylvania I" is the first two-propeller biplane chainless car,
      this scheme having been adopted in order to avoid the crossing of chains.
      The lateral control is by a new invention by Octave Chanute and Laurence
      J. Lesh, for which Lesh is now applying for a patent. The device was
      worked out before the Wright brothers' suit was begun, and is said to be
      superior to the Wright warping or the Curtiss ailerons. The landing device
      is also new in design. This aeroplane will weigh about 1,500 pounds, and
      will carry fuel for a flight of 150 miles, and it is expected to attain a
      speed of at least 45 miles an hour.
    

      There are others, lots of them, too numerous in fact to admit of mention
      in a book of this size.
    


 








      CHAPTER XVIII. DEMAND FOR FLYING MACHINES.
    

      As a commercial proposition the manufacture and sale of motor-equipped
      aeroplanes is making much more rapid advance than at first obtained in the
      similar handling of the automobile. Great, and even phenomenal, as was the
      commercial development of the motor car, that of the flying machine is
      even greater. This is a startling statement, but it is fully warranted by
      the facts.
    

      It is barely more than a year ago (1909) that attention was seriously
      attracted to the motor-equipped aeroplane as a vehicle possible of
      manipulation by others than professional aviators. Up to that time such
      actual flights as were made were almost exclusively with the sole purpose
      of demonstrating the practicability of the machine, and the merits of the
      ideas as to shape, engine power, etc., of the various producers.
    

      Results of Bleriot's Daring.
    

      It was not until Bleriot flew across the straits of Dover on July 25th,
      1909, that the general public awoke to a full realization of the fact that
      it was possible for others than professional aviators to indulge in
      aviation. Bleriot's feat was accepted as proof that at last an absolutely
      new means of sport, pleasure and research, had been practically developed,
      and was within the reach of all who had the inclination, nerve and
      financial means to adopt it.
    

      From this event may be dated the birth of the modern flying machine into
      the world of business. The automobile was taken up by the general public
      from the very start because it was a proposition comparatively easy of
      demonstration. There was nothing mysterious or uncanny in the fact that a
      wheeled vehicle could be propelled on solid, substantial roads by means of
      engine power. And yet it took (comparatively speaking) a long time to
      really popularize the motor car.
    

      Wonderful Results in a Year.
    

      Men of large financial means engaged in the manufacture of automobiles,
      and expended fortunes in attracting public attention to them through the
      medium of advertisements, speed and road contests, etc. By these means a
      mammoth business has been built up, but bringing this business to its
      present proportions required years of patient industry and indomitable
      pluck.
    

      At this writing, less than a year from the day when Bleriot crossed the
      channel, the actual sales of flying machines outnumber the actual sales of
      automobiles in the first year of their commercial development. This may
      appear incredible, but it is a fact as statistics will show.
    

      In this connection we should take into consideration the fact that up to a
      year ago there was no serious intention of putting flying machines on the
      market; no preparations had been made to produce them on a commercial
      scale; no money had been expended in advertisements with a view to selling
      them.
    

      Some of the Actual Results.
    

      Today flying machines are being produced on a commercial basis, and there
      is a big demand for them. The people making them are overcrowded with
      orders. Some of the producers are already making arrangements to enlarge
      their plants and advertise their product for sale the same as is being
      done with automobiles, while a number of flying machine motor makers are
      already promoting the sale of their wares in this way.
    

      Here are a few actual figures of flying machine sales made by the more
      prominent producers since July 25th, 1909.
    

      Santos Dumont, 90 machines; Bleriot, 200; Farman, 130; Clemenceau-Wright,
      80; Voisin, 100; Antoinette, 100. Many of these orders have been filled by
      delivery of the machines, and in others the construction work is under
      way.
    

      The foregoing are all of foreign make. In this country Curtiss and the
      Wrights are engaged in similar work, but no actual figures of their output
      are obtainable.
    

      Larger Plants Are Necessary.
    

      And this situation exists despite the fact that none of the producers are
      really equipped with adequate plants for turning out their machines on a
      modern, business-like basis. The demand was so sudden and unexpected that
      it found them poorly prepared to meet it. This, however, is now being
      remedied by the erection of special plants, the enlargement of others, and
      the introduction of new machinery and other labor-saving conveniences.
    

      Companies, with large capitalization, to engage in the exclusive
      production of airships are being organized in many parts of the world. One
      notable instance of this nature is worth quoting as illustrative of the
      manner in which the production of flying machines is being commercialized.
      This is the formation at Frankfort, Germany, of the Flugmaschine Wright,
      G. m. b. H., with a capital of $119,000, the Krupps, of Essen, being
      interested.
    

      Prices at Which Machines Sell.
    

      This wonderful demand from the public has come notwithstanding the fact
      that the machines, owing to lack of facilities for wholesale production,
      are far from being cheap. Such definite quotations as are made are on the
      following basis:
    

      Santos Dumont—List price $1,000, but owing to the rush of orders
      agents are readily getting from $1,300 to $1,500. This is the smallest
      machine made.
    

      Bleriot—List price $2,500. This is for the cross-channel type, with
      Anzani motor.
    

      Antoinette—List price from $4,000 to $5,000, according to size.
    

      Wright—List price $5,600.
    

      Curtiss—List price $5,000.
    

      There is, however, no stability in prices as purchasers are almost
      invariably ready to pay a considerable premium to facilitate delivery.
    

      The motor is the most expensive part of the flying machine. Motor prices
      range from $500 to $2,000, this latter amount being asked for the Curtiss
      engine.
    

      Systematic Instruction of Amateurs.
    

      In addition to the production of flying machines many of the experienced
      aviators are making a business of the instruction of amateurs. Curtiss and
      the Wrights in this country have a number of pupils, as have also the
      prominent foreigners. Schools of instruction are being opened in various
      parts of the world, not alone as private money-making ventures, but in
      connection with public educational institutions. One of these latter is to
      be found at the University of Barcelona, Spain.
    

      The flying machine agent, the man who handles the machines on a
      commission, has also become a known quantity, and will soon be as numerous
      as his brother of the automobile. The sign "John Bird, agent for Skimmer's
      Flying Machine," is no longer a curiosity.
    

      Yes, the Airship Is Here.
    

      From all of which we may well infer that the flying machine in practical
      form has arrived, and that it is here to stay. It is no exaggeration to
      say that the time is close at hand when people will keep flying machines
      just as they now keep automobiles, and that pleasure jaunts will be fully
      as numerous and popular. With the important item of practicability fully
      demonstrated, "Come, take a trip in my airship," will have more real
      significance than now attaches to the vapid warblings of the vaudeville
      vocalist.
    

      As a further evidence that the airship is really here, and that its
      presence is recognized in a business way, the action of life and accident
      insurance companies is interesting. Some of them are reconstructing their
      policies so as to include a special waiver of insurance by aviators.
      Anything which compels these great corporations to modify their policies
      cannot be looked upon as a mere curiosity or toy.
    

      It is some consolation to know that the movement in this direction is not
      thus far widespread. Moreover it is more than probable that the
      competition for business will eventually induce the companies to act more
      liberally toward aviators, especially as the art of aviation advances.
    


 








      CHAPTER XIX. LAW OF THE AIRSHIP.
    

      Successful aviation has evoked some peculiar things in the way of legal
      action and interpretation of the law.
    

      It is well understood that a man's property cannot be used without his
      consent. This is an old established principle in common law which holds
      good today.
    

      The limits of a man's property lines, however, have not been so well
      understood by laymen. According to eminent legal authorities such as
      Blackstone, Littleton and Coke, the "fathers of the law," the owner of
      realty also holds title above and below the surface, and this theory is
      generally accepted without question by the courts.
    

      Rights of Property Owners.
    

      In other words the owner of realty also owns the sky above it without
      limit as to distance. He can dig as deep into his land, or go as high into
      the air as he desires, provided he does not trespass upon or injure
      similar rights of others.
    

      The owner of realty may resist by force, all other means having failed,
      any trespass upon, or invasion of his property. Other people, for
      instance, may not enter upon it, or over or under it, without his express
      permission and consent. There is only one exception, and this is in the
      case of public utility corporations such as railways which, under the law
      of eminent domain, may condemn a right of way across the property of an
      obstinate owner who declines to accept a fair price for the privilege.
    

      Privilege Sharply Confined.
    

      The law of eminent domain may be taken advantage of only by corporations
      which are engaged in serving the public. It is based upon the principle
      that the advancement and improvement of a community is of more importance
      and carries with it more rights than the interests of the individual
      owner. But even in cases where the right of eminent domain is exercised
      there can be no confiscation of the individual's property.
    

      Exercising the right of eminent domain is merely obtaining by public
      purchase what is held to be essential to the public good, and which cannot
      be secured by private purchase. When eminent domain proceedings are
      resorted to the court appoints appraisers who determine upon the value of
      the property wanted, and this value (in money) is paid to the owner.
    

      How It Affects Aviation.
    

      It should be kept in mind that this privilege of the "right of eminent
      domain" is accorded only to corporations which are engaged in serving the
      public. Individuals cannot take advantage of it. Thus far all aviation has
      been conducted by individuals; there are no flying machine or airship
      corporations regularly engaged in the transportation of passengers, mails
      or freight.
    

      This leads up to the question "What would happen if realty owners
      generally, or in any considerable numbers, should prohibit the navigation
      of the air above their holdings?" It is idle to say such a possibility is
      ridiculous—it is already an actuality in a few individual instances.
    

      One property owner in New Jersey, a justice of the peace, maintains a
      large sign on the roof of his house warning aviators that they must not
      trespass upon his domain. That he is acting well within his rights in
      doing this is conceded by legal authorities.
    

      Hard to Catch Offenders.
    

      But, suppose the alleged trespass is committed, what is the property owner
      going to do about it? He must first catch the trespasser and this would be
      a pretty hard job. He certainly could not overtake him, unless he kept a
      racing aeroplane for this special purpose. It would be equally difficult
      to identify the offender after the offense had been committed, even if he
      were located, as aeroplanes carry no license numbers.
    

      Allowing that the offender should be caught the only recourse of the
      realty owner is an action for damages. He may prevent the commission of
      the offense by force if necessary, but after it is committed he can only
      sue for damages. And in doing this he would have a lot of trouble.
    

      Points to Be Proven.
    

      One of the first things the plaintiff would be called upon to prove would
      be the elevation of the machine. If it were reasonably close to the ground
      there would, of course, be grave risk of damage to fences, shrubbery, and
      other property, and the court would be justified in holding it to be a
      nuisance that should be suppressed.
    

      If, on the other hand; the machine was well up in the air, but going
      slowly, or hovering over the plaintiff's property, the court might be
      inclined to rule that it could not possibly be a nuisance, but right here
      the court would be in serious embarrassment. By deciding that it was not a
      nuisance he would virtually override the law against invasion of a man's
      property without his consent regardless of the nature of the invasion. By
      the same decision he would also say in effect that, if one flying machine
      could do this a dozen or more would have equal right to do the same thing.
      While one machine hovering over a certain piece of property may be no
      actual nuisance a dozen or more in the same position could hardly be
      excused.
    

      Difficult to Fix Damages.
    

      Such a condition would tend to greatly increase the risk of accident,
      either through collision, or by the carelessness of the aviators in
      dropping articles which might cause damages to the people or property
      below. In such a case it would undoubtedly be a nuisance, and in addition
      to a fine, the offender would also be liable for the damages.
    

      Taking it for granted that no actual damage is done, and the owner merely
      sues on account of the invasion of his property, how is the amount of
      compensation to be fixed upon? The owner has lost nothing; no part of his
      possessions has been taken away; nothing has been injured or destroyed;
      everything is left in exactly the same condition as before the invasion.
      And yet, if the law is strictly interpreted, the offender is liable.
    

      Right of Way for Airships.
    

      Somebody has suggested the organization of flying-machine corporations as
      common carriers, which would give them the right of eminent domain with
      power to condemn a right of way. But what would they condemn? There is
      nothing tangible in the air. Railways in condemning a right of way specify
      tangible property (realty) within certain limits. How would an aviator
      designate any particular right of way through the air a certain number of
      feet in width, and a certain distance from the ground?
    

      And yet, should the higher courts hold to the letter of the law and decide
      that aviators have no right to navigate their craft over private property,
      something will have to be done to get them out of the dilemma, as aviation
      is too far advanced to be discarded. Fortunately there is little prospect
      of any widespread antagonism among property owners so long as aviators
      refrain from making nuisances of themselves.
    

      Possible Solution Offered.
    

      One possible solution is offered and that is to confine the path of
      airships to the public highways so that nobody's property rights would be
      invaded. In addition, as a matter of promoting safety for both operators
      and those who may happen to be beneath the airships as they pass over a
      course, adoption of the French rules are suggested. These are as follows:
    

      Aeroplanes, when passing, must keep to the right, and pass at a distance
      of at least 150 feet. They are free from this rule when flying at
      altitudes of more than 100 feet. Every machine when flying at night or
      during foggy weather must carry a green light on the right, and a red
      light on the left, and a white headlight on the front.
    

      These are sensible rules, but may be improved upon by the addition of a
      signal system of some kind, either horn, whistle or bell.
    

      Responsibility of Aviators.
    

      Mr. Jay Carver Bossard, in recent numbers of Fly, brings out some
      curious and interesting legal points in connection with aviation, among
      which are the following:
    

      "Private parties who possess aerial craft, and desire to operate the same
      in aerial territory other than their own, must obtain from land owners
      special permission to do so, such permission to be granted only by
      agreement, founded upon a valid consideration. Otherwise, passing over
      another's land will in each instance amount to a trespass.
    

      "Leaving this highly technical side of the question, let us turn to
      another view: the criminal and tort liability of owners and operators to
      airship passengers. If A invites B to make an ascension with him in his
      machine, and B, knowing that A is merely an enthusiastic amateur and far
      from being an expert, accepts and is through A's innocent negligence
      injured, he has no grounds for recovery. But if A contracts with B, to
      transport him from one place to another, for a consideration, and B is
      injured by the poor piloting of A, A would be liable to B for damages
      which would result. Now in order to safeguard such people as B, curious to
      the point of recklessness, the law will have to require all airship
      operators to have a license, and to secure this license airship pilots
      will have to meet certain requirements. Here again is a question. Who is
      going to say whether an applicant is competent to pilot a balloon or
      airship?
    

      Fine for an Aeronaut.
    

      "An aeroplane while maneuvering is suddenly caught by a treacherous gale
      and swept to the ground. A crowd of people hasten over to see if the
      aeronaut is injured, and in doing so trample over Tax-payer Smith's
      garden, much to the detriment of his growing vegetables and flowers. Who
      is liable for the damages? Queer as it may seem, a case very similar to
      this was decided in 1823, in the New York supreme court, and it was held
      that the aeronaut was liable upon the following grounds: 'To render one
      man liable in trespass for the acts of others, it must appear either that
      they acted in concert, or that the act of the one, ordinarily and
      naturally produced the acts of the others, Ascending in a balloon is not
      an unlawful act, but it is certain that the aeronaut has no control over
      its motion horizontally, but is at the sport of the wind, and is to
      descend when and how he can. His reaching the earth is a matter of hazard.
      If his descent would according to the circumstances draw a crowd of people
      around him, either out of curiosity, or for the purpose of rescuing him
      from a perilous situation, all this he ought to have foreseen, and must be
      responsible for.'
    

      Air Not Really Free.
    

      "The general belief among people is, that the air is free. Not only free
      to breathe and enjoy, but free to travel in, and that no one has any
      definite jurisdiction over, or in any part of it. Now suppose this were
      made a legal doctrine. Would a murder perpetrated above the clouds have to
      go unpunished? Undoubtedly. For felonies committed upon the high seas
      ample provision is made for their punishment, but new provisions will have
      to be made for crimes committed in the air.
    

      Relations of Owner and Employee.
    

      "It is a general rule of law that a master is bound to provide reasonably
      safe tools, appliances and machines for his servant. How this rule is
      going to be applied in cases of aeroplanes, remains to be seen. The
      aeroplane owner who hires a professional aeronaut, that is, one who has
      qualified as an expert, owes him very little legal duty to supply him with
      a perfect aeroplane. The expert is supposed to know as much regarding the
      machine as the owner, if not more, and his acceptance of his position
      relieves the owner from liability. When the owner hires an amateur
      aeronaut to run the aeroplane, and teaches him how to manipulate it, even
      though the prescribed manner of manipulation will make flight safe,
      nevertheless if the machine is visibly defective, or known to be so, any
      injury which results to the aeronaut the owner is liable for.
    

      As to Aeroplane Contracts.
    

      "At the present time there are many orders being placed with aeroplane
      manufacturing companies. There are some unique questions to be raised here
      under the law of contract. It is an elementary principle of law that no
      one can be compelled to complete a contract which in itself is impossible
      to perform. For instance, a contract to row a boat across the Atlantic in
      two weeks, for a consideration, could never be enforced because it is
      within judicial knowledge that such an undertaking is beyond human power.
      Again, contracts formed for the doing of acts contrary to nature are never
      enforcible, and here is where our difficulty comes in. Is it possible to
      build a machine or species of craft which will transport a person or goods
      through the air? The courts know that balloons are practical; that is,
      they know that a bag filled with gas has a lifting power and can move
      through the air at an appreciable height. Therefore, a contract to
      transport a person in such manner is a good contract, and the conditions
      being favorable could undoubtedly be enforced. But the passengers' right
      of action for injury would be very limited.
    

      No Redress for Purchasers.
    

      "In the case of giving warranties on aeroplanes, we have yet to see just
      what a court is going to say. It is easy enough for a manufacturer to
      guarantee to build a machine of certain dimensions and according to
      certain specifications, but when he inserts a clause in the contract to
      the effect that the machine will raise itself from the surface of the
      earth, defy the laws of gravity, and soar in the heavens at the will of
      the aviator, he is to say the least contracting to perform a miracle.
    

      "Until aeroplanes have been made and accepted as practical, no court will
      force a manufacturer to turn out a machine guaranteed to fly. So
      purchasers can well remember that if their machines refuse to fly they
      have no redress against the maker, for he can always say, 'The industry is
      still in its experimental stage.' In contracting for an engine no builder
      will guarantee that the particular engine will successfully operate the
      aeroplane. In fact he could never be forced to live up to such an
      agreement, should he agree to a stipulation of that sort. The best any
      engine maker will guarantee is to build an engine according to
      specifications."
    


 








      CHAPTER XX. SOARING FLIGHT.
    

      By Octave Chanute.
    

5
      There is a wonderful performance daily exhibited in southern climes and
      occasionally seen in northerly latitudes in summer, which has never been
      thoroughly explained. It is the soaring or sailing flight of certain
      varieties of large birds who transport themselves on rigid, unflapping
      wings in any desired direction; who in winds of 6 to 20 miles per hour,
      circle, rise, advance, return and remain aloft for hours without a beat of
      wing, save for getting under way or convenience in various maneuvers. They
      appear to obtain from the wind alone all the necessary energy, even to
      advancing dead against that wind. This feat is so much opposed to our
      general ideas of physics that those who have not seen it sometimes deny
      its actuality, and those who have only occasionally witnessed it
      subsequently doubt the evidence of their own eyes. Others, who have seen
      the exceptional performances, speculate on various explanations, but the
      majority give it up as a sort of "negative gravity."
    

      Soaring Power of Birds.
    

      The writer of this paper published in the "Aeronautical Annual" for 1896
      and 1897 an article upon the sailing flight of birds, in which he gave a
      list of the authors who had described such flight or had advanced theories
      for its explanation, and he passed these in review. He also described his
      own observations and submitted some computations to account for the
      observed facts. These computations were correct as far as they went, but
      they were scanty. It was, for instance, shown convincingly by analysis
      that a gull weighing 2.188 pounds, with a total supporting surface of
      2.015 square feet, a maximum body cross-section of 0.126 square feet and a
      maximum cross-section of wing edges of 0.098 square feet, patrolling on
      rigid wings (soaring) on the weather side of a steamer and maintaining an
      upward angle or attitude of 5 degrees to 7 degrees above the horizon, in a
      wind blowing 12.78 miles an hour, which was deflected upward 10 degrees to
      20 degrees by the side of the steamer (these all being carefully observed
      facts), was perfectly sustained at its own "relative speed" of 17.88 miles
      per hour and extracted from the upward trend of the wind sufficient energy
      to overcome all the resistances, this energy amounting to 6.44 foot-pounds
      per second.
    

      Great Power of Gulls.
    

      It was shown that the same bird in flapping flight in calm air, with an
      attitude or incidence of 3 degrees to 5 degrees above the horizon and a
      speed of 20.4 miles an hour was well sustained and expended 5.88
      foot-pounds per second, this being at the rate of 204 pounds sustained per
      horsepower. It was stated also that a gull in its observed maneuvers,
      rising up from a pile head on unflapping wings, then plunging forward
      against the wind and subsequently rising higher than his starting point,
      must either time his ascents and descents exactly with the variations in
      wind velocities, or must meet a wind billow rotating on a horizontal axis
      and come to a poise on its crest, thus availing of an ascending trend.
    

      But the observations failed to demonstrate that the variations of the wind
      gusts and the movements of the bird were absolutely synchronous, and it
      was conjectured that the peculiar shape of the soaring wing of certain
      birds, as differentiated from the flapping wing, might, when experimented
      upon, hereafter account for the performance.
    

      Mystery to be Explained.
    

      These computations, however satisfactory they were for the speed of winds
      observed, failed to account for the observed spiral soaring of buzzards in
      very light winds and the writer was compelled to confess: "Now, this
      spiral soaring in steady breezes of 5 to 10 miles per hour which are
      apparently horizontal, and through which the bird maintains an average
      speed of about 20 miles an hour, is the mystery to be explained. It is not
      accounted for, quantitatively, by any of the theories which have been
      advanced, and it is the one performance which has led some observers to
      claim that it was done through 'aspiration.' i, e., that a bird acted upon
      by a current, actually drew forward into that current against its exact
      direction of motion."
    

      Buzzards Soar in Dead Calm.
    

      A still greater mystery was propounded by the few observers who asserted
      that they had seen buzzards soaring in a dead calm, maintaining their
      elevation and their speed. Among these observers was Mr. E. C. Huffaker,
      at one time assistant experimenter for Professor Langley. The writer
      believed and said then that he must in some way have been mistaken, yet,
      to satisfy himself, he paid several visits to Mr. Huffaker, in Eastern
      Tennessee and took along his anemometer. He saw quite a number of buzzards
      sailing at a height of 75 to 100 feet in breezes measuring 5 or 6 miles an
      hour at the surface of the ground, and once he saw one buzzard soaring
      apparently in a dead calm.
    

      The writer was fairly baffled. The bird was not simply gliding, utilizing
      gravity or acquired momentum, he was actually circling horizontally in
      defiance of physics and mathematics. It took two years and a whole series
      of further observations to bring those two sciences into accord with the
      facts.
    

      Results of Close Observations.
    

      Curiously enough the key to the performance of circling in a light wind or
      a dead calm was not found through the usual way of gathering human
      knowledge, i. e., through observations and experiment. These had failed
      because I did not know what to look for. The mystery was, in fact, solved
      by an eclectic process of conjecture and computation, but once these
      computations indicated what observations should be made, the results gave
      at once the reasons for the circling of the birds, for their then observed
      attitude, and for the necessity of an independent initial sustaining speed
      before soaring began. Both Mr. Huffaker and myself verified the data many
      times and I made the computations.
    

      These observations disclosed several facts:
    

      1st.—That winds blowing five to seventeen miles per hour frequently
      had rising trends of 10 degrees to 15 degrees, and that upon occasions
      when there seemed to be absolutely no wind, there was often nevertheless a
      local rising of the air estimated at a rate of four to eight miles or more
      per hour. This was ascertained by watching thistledown, and rising fogs
      alongside of trees or hills of known height. Everyone will readily realize
      that when walking at the rate of four to eight miles an hour in a dead
      calm the "relative wind" is quite inappreciable to the senses and that
      such a rising air would not be noticed.
    

      2nd.—That the buzzard, sailing in an apparently dead horizontal
      calm, progressed at speeds of fifteen to eighteen miles per hour, as
      measured by his shadow on the ground. It was thought that the air was then
      possibly rising 8.8 feet per second, or six miles per hour.
    

      3rd.—That when soaring in very light winds the angle of incidence of
      the buzzards was negative to the horizon—i. e., that when seen
      coming toward the eye, the afternoon light shone on the back instead of on
      the breast, as would have been the case had the angle been inclined above
      the horizon.
    

      4th.—That the sailing performance only occurred after the bird had
      acquired an initial velocity of at least fifteen or eighteen miles per
      hour, either by industrious flapping or by descending from a perch.
    

      An Interesting Experiment.
    

      5th.—That the whole resistance of a stuffed buzzard, at a negative
      angle of 3 degrees in a current of air of 15.52 miles per hour, was 0.27
      pounds. This test was kindly made for the writer by Professor A. F. Zahm
      in the "wind tunnel" of the Catholic University at Washington, D. C., who,
      moreover, stated that the resistance of a live bird might be less, as the
      dried plumage could not be made to lie smooth.
    

      This particular buzzard weighed in life 4.25 pounds, the area of his wings
      and body was 4.57 square feet, the maximum cross-section of his body was
      0.110 square feet, and that of his wing edges when fully extended was
      0.244 square feet.
    

      With these data, it became surprisingly easy to compute the performance
      with the coefficients of Lilienthal for various angles of incidence and to
      demonstrate how this buzzard could soar horizontally in a dead horizontal
      calm, provided that it was not a vertical calm, and that the air was
      rising at the rate of four or six miles per hour, the lowest observed, and
      quite inappreciable without actual measuring.
    

      Some Data on Bird Power.
    

      The most difficult case is purposely selected. For if we assume that the
      bird has previously acquired an initial minimum speed of seventeen miles
      an hour (24.93 feet per second, nearly the lowest measured), and that the
      air was rising vertically six miles an hour (8.80 feet per second), then
      we have as the trend of the "relative wind" encountered:
    

      6
      — = 0.353, or the tangent of 19 degrees 26'.
      17


      which brings the case into the category of rising wind effects. But the
      bird was observed to have a negative angle to the horizon of about 3
      degrees, as near as could be guessed, so that his angle of incidence to
      the "relative wind" was reduced to 16 degrees 26'.
    

      The relative speed of his soaring was therefore:
    

      Velocity = square root of (17 squared + 6 squared) = 18.03 miles per hour.
    

      At this speed, using the Langley co-efficient recently practically
      confirmed by the accurate experiments of Mr. Eiffel, the air pressure
      would be:
    

      18.03 squared X 0.00327 = 1.063 pounds per square foot.
    

      If we apply Lilienthal's co-efficients for an angle of 6 degrees 26', we
      have for the force in action:
    

   Normal: 4.57 X 1.063 X 0.912 = 4.42 pounds.

   Tangential: 4.57 X 1.063 X 0.074 = - 0.359 pounds,
   which latter, being negative, is a propelling force.


      Results Astonish Scientists.
    

      Thus we have a bird weighing 4.25 pounds not only thoroughly supported,
      but impelled forward by a force of 0.359 pounds, at seventeen miles per
      hour, while the experiments of Professor A. F. Zahm showed that the
      resistance at 15.52 miles per hour was only 0.27 pounds,
    

              17 squared
   or 0.27 X ———- = 0.324 pounds, at seventeen miles an
             15.52 squared
   hour.


      These are astonishing results from the data obtained, and they lead to the
      inquiry whether the energy of the rising air is sufficient to make up the
      losses which occur by reason of the resistance and friction of the bird's
      body and wings, which, being rounded, do not encounter air pressures in
      proportion to their maximum cross-section.
    

      We have no accurate data upon the co-efficients to apply and estimates
      made by myself proved to be much smaller than the 0.27 pounds resistance
      measured by Professor Zahm, so that we will figure with the latter as
      modified. As the speed is seventeen miles per hour, or 24.93 feet per
      second, we have for the work:
    

      Work done, 0.324 X 24.93 = 8.07 foot pounds per second.
    

      Endorsed by Prof. Marvin.
    

      Corresponding energy of rising air is not sufficient at four miles per
      hour. This amounts to but 2.10 foot pounds per second, but if we assume
      that the air was rising at the rate of seven miles per hour (10.26 feet
      per second), at which the pressure with the Langley coefficient would be
      0.16 pounds per square foot, we have on 4.57 square feet for energy of
      rising air: 4.57 X 0.16 X 10.26 = 7.50 foot pounds per second, which is
      seen to be still a little too small, but well within the limits of error,
      in view of the hollow shape of the bird's wings, which receive greater
      pressure than the flat planes experimented upon by Langley.
    

      These computations were chiefly made in January, 1899, and were
      communicated to a few friends, who found no fallacy in them, but thought
      that few aviators would understand them if published. They were then
      submitted to Professor C. F. Marvin of the Weather Bureau, who is well
      known as a skillful physicist and mathematician. He wrote that they were,
      theoretically, entirely sound and quantitatively, probably, as accurate as
      the present state of the measurements of wind pressures permitted. The
      writer determined, however, to withhold publication until the feat of
      soaring flight had been performed by man, partly because he believed that,
      to ensure safety, it would be necessary that the machine should be
      equipped with a motor in order to supplement any deficiency in wind force.
    

      Conditions Unfavorable for Wrights.
    

      The feat would have been attempted in 1902 by Wright brothers if the local
      circumstances had been more favorable. They were experimenting on "Kill
      Devil Hill," near Kitty Hawk, N. C. This sand hill, about 100 feet high,
      is bordered by a smooth beach on the side whence come the sea breezes, but
      has marshy ground at the back. Wright brothers were apprehensive that if
      they rose on the ascending current of air at the front and began to circle
      like the birds, they might be carried by the descending current past the
      back of the hill and land in the marsh. Their gliding machine offered no
      greater head resistance in proportion than the buzzard, and their gliding
      angles of descent are practically as favorable, but the birds performed
      higher up in the air than they.
    

      Langley's Idea of Aviation.
    

      Professor Langley said in concluding his paper upon "The Internal Work of
      the Wind":
    

      "The final application of these principles to the art of aerodromics
      seems, then, to be, that while it is not likely that the perfected
      aerodrome will ever be able to dispense altogether with the ability to
      rely at intervals on some internal source of power, it will not be
      indispensable that this aerodrome of the future shall, in order to go any
      distance—even to circumnavigate the globe without alighting—need
      to carry a weight of fuel which would enable it to perform this journey
      under conditions analogous to those of a steamship, but that the fuel and
      weight need only be such as to enable it to take care of itself in
      exceptional moments of calm."
    

      Now that dynamic flying machines have been evolved and are being brought
      under control, it seems to be worth while to make these computations and
      the succeeding explanations known, so that some bold man will attempt the
      feat of soaring like a bird. The theory underlying the performance in a
      rising wind is not new, it has been suggested by Penaud and others, but it
      has attracted little attention because the exact data and the maneuvers
      required were not known and the feat had not yet been performed by a man.
      The puzzle has always been to account for the observed act in very light
      winds, and it is hoped that by the present selection of the most difficult
      case to explain—i. e., the soaring in a dead horizontal calm—somebody
      will attempt the exploit.
    

      Requisites for Soaring Flights.
    

      The following are deemed to be the requisites and maneuvers to master the
      secrets of soaring flight:
    

      1st—Develop a dynamic flying machine weighing about one pound per
      square foot of area, with stable equilibrium and under perfect control,
      capable of gliding by gravity at angles of one in ten (5 3/4 degrees) in
      still air.
    

      2nd.—Select locations where soaring birds abound and occasions where
      rising trends of gentle winds are frequent and to be relied on.
    

      3rd.—Obtain an initial velocity of at least 25 feet per second
      before attempting to soar.
    

      4th.—So locate the center of gravity that the apparatus shall assume
      a negative angle, fore and aft, of about 3 degrees.
    

      Calculations show, however, that sufficient propelling force may still
      exist at 0 degrees, but disappears entirely at +4 degrees.
    

      5th.—Circle like the bird. Simultaneously with the steering, incline
      the apparatus to the side toward which it is desired to turn, so that the
      centrifugal force shall be balanced by the centripetal force. The amount
      of the required inclination depends upon the speed and on the radius of
      the circle swept over.
    

      6th.—Rise spirally like the bird. Steer with the horizontal rudder,
      so as to descend slightly when going with the wind and to ascend when
      going against the wind. The bird circles over one spot because the rising
      trends of wind are generally confined to small areas or local chimneys, as
      pointed out by Sir H. Maxim and others.
    

      7th.—Once altitude is gained, progress may be made in any direction
      by gliding downward by gravity.
    

      The bird's flying apparatus and skill are as yet infinitely superior to
      those of man, but there are indications that within a few years the latter
      may evolve more accurately proportioned apparatus and obtain absolute
      control over it.
    

      It is hoped, therefore, that if there be found no radical error in the
      above computations, they will carry the conviction that soaring flight is
      not inaccessible to man, as it promises great economies of motive power in
      favorable localities of rising winds.
    

      The writer will be grateful to experts who may point out any mistake
      committed in data or calculations, and will furnish additional information
      to any aviator who may wish to attempt the feat of soaring.
    


 








      CHAPTER XXI. FLYING MACHINES VS. BALLOONS.
    

      While wonderful success has attended the development of the dirigible
      (steerable) balloon the most ardent advocates of this form of aerial
      navigation admit that it has serious drawbacks. Some of these may be
      described as follows:
    

      Expense and Other Items.
    

      Great Initial Expense.—The modern dirigible balloon costs a fortune.
      The Zeppelin, for instance, costs more than $100,000 (these are official
      figures).
    

      Expense of Inflation.—Gas evaporates rapidly, and a balloon must be
      re-inflated, or partially re-inflated, every time it is used. The Zeppelin
      holds 460,000 cubic feet of gas which, even at $1 per thousand, would cost
      $460.
    

      Difficulty of Obtaining Gas.—If a balloon suddenly becomes deflated,
      by accident or atmospheric conditions, far from a source of gas supply, it
      is practically worthless. Gas must be piped to it, or the balloon carted
      to the gas house—an expensive proceeding in either event.
    

      Lack of Speed and Control.
    

      Lack of Speed.—Under the most favorable conditions the maximum speed
      of a balloon is 30 miles an hour. Its great bulk makes the high speed
      attained by flying machines impossible.
    

      Difficulty of Control.—While the modern dirigible balloon is readily
      handled in calm or light winds, its bulk makes it difficult to control in
      heavy winds.
    

      The Element of Danger.—Numerous balloons have been destroyed by
      lightning and similar causes. One of the largest of the Zeppelins was thus
      lost at Stuttgart in 1908.
    

      Some Balloon Performances.
    

      It is only a matter of fairness to state that, under favorable conditions,
      some very creditable records have been made with modern balloons, viz:
    

      November 23d, 1907, the French dirigible Patrie, travelled 187 miles in 6
      hours and 45 minutes against a light wind. This was a little over 28 miles
      an hour.
    

      The Clement-Bayard, another French machine, sold to the Russian
      government, made a trip of 125 miles at a rate of 27 miles an hour.
    

      Zeppelin No. 3, carrying eight passengers, and having a total lifting
      capacity of 5,500 pounds of ballast in addition to passengers, weight of
      equipment, etc., was tested in October, 1906, and made 67 miles in 2 hours
      and 17 minutes, about 30 miles an hour.
    

      These are the best balloon trips on record, and show forcefully the
      limitations of speed, the greatest being not over 30 miles an hour.
    

      Speed of Flying Machines.
    

      Opposed to the balloon performances we have flying machine trips (of
      authentic records) as follows:
    

      Bleriot—monoplane—in 1908—52 miles an hour.
    

      Delagrange—June 22, 1908—10 1/2 miles in 16 minutes,
      approximately 42 miles an hour.
    

      Wrights—October, 1905—the machine was then in its infancy—24
      miles in 38 minutes, approximately 44 miles an hour. On December 31, 1908,
      the Wrights made 77 miles in 2 hours and 20 minutes.
    

      Lambert, a pupil of the Wrights, and using a Wright biplane, on October
      18, 1909, covered 29.82 miles in 49 minutes and 39 seconds, being at the
      rate of 36 miles an hour. This flight was made at a height of 1,312 feet.
    

      Latham—October 21, 1909—made a short flight, about 11 minutes,
      in the teeth of a 40 mile gale, at Blackpool, Eng. He used an Antoniette
      monoplane, and the official report says: "This exhibition of nerve, daring
      and ability is unparalled in the history of aviation."
    

      Farman—October 20, 1909—was in the air for 1 hour, 32 min., 16
      seconds, travelling 47 miles, 1,184 yards, a duration record for England.
    

      Paulhan—January 18, 1901—47 1/2 miles at the rate of 45 miles
      an hour, maintaining an altitude of from 1,000 to 2,000 feet.
    

      Expense of Producing Gas.
    

      Gas is indispensable in the operation of dirigible balloons, and gas is
      expensive. Besides this it is not always possible to obtain it in
      sufficient quantities even in large cities, as the supply on hand is
      generally needed for regular customers. Such as can be had is either water
      or coal gas, neither of which is as efficient in lifting power as
      hydrogen.
    

      Hydrogen is the lightest and consequently the most buoyant of all known
      gases. It is secured commercially by treating zinc or iron with dilute
      sulphuric or hydrochloric acid. The average cost may be safely placed at
      $10 per 1,000 feet so that, to inflate a balloon of the size of the
      Zeppelin, holding 460,000 cubic feet, would cost $4,600.
    

      Proportions of Materials Required.
    

      In making hydrogen gas it is customary to allow 20 per cent for loss
      between the generation and the introduction of the gas into the balloon.
      Thus, while the formula calls for iron 28 times heavier than the weight of
      the hydrogen required, and acid 49 times heavier, the real quantities are
      20 per cent greater. Hydrogen weighs about 0.09 ounce to the cubic foot.
      Consequently if we need say 450,000 cubic feet of gas we must have
      2,531.25 pounds in weight. To produce this, allowing for the 20 percent
      loss, we must have 35 times its weight in iron, or over 44 tons. Of acid
      it would take 60 times the weight of the gas, or nearly 76 tons.
    

      In Time of Emergency.
    

      These figures are appalling, and under ordinary conditions would be
      prohibitive, but there are times when the balloon operator, unable to
      obtain water or coal gas, must foot the bills. In military maneuvers,
      where the field of operation is fixed, it is possible to furnish supplies
      of hydrogen gas in portable cylinders, but on long trips where sudden
      leakage or other cause makes descent in an unexpected spot unavoidable, it
      becomes a question of making your own hydrogen gas or deserting the
      balloon. And when this occurs the balloonist is up against another serious
      proposition—can he find the necessary zinc or iron? Can he get the
      acid?
    

      Balloons for Commercial Use.
    

      Despite all this the balloon has its uses. If there is to be such a thing
      as aerial navigation in a commercial way—the carrying of freight and
      passengers—it will come through the employment of such monster
      balloons as Count Zeppelin is building. But even then the carrying
      capacity must of necessity be limited. The latest Zeppelin creation, a
      monster in size, is 450 feet long, and 42 1/2 feet in diameter. The
      dimensions are such as to make all other balloons look like pigmies; even
      many ocean-going steamers are much smaller, and yet its passenger capacity
      is very small. On its 36-hour flight in May, 1909, the Zeppelin, carried
      only eight passengers. The speed, however, was quite respectable, 850
      miles being covered in the 36 hours, a trifle over 23 miles an hour. The
      reserve buoyancy, that is the total lifting capacity aside from the weight
      of the airship and its equipment, is estimated at three tons.
    


 








      CHAPTER XXII. PROBLEMS OF AERIAL FLIGHT.
    

      In a lecture before the Royal Society of Arts, reported in Engineering, F.
      W. Lanchester took the position that practical flight was not the abstract
      question which some apparently considered it to be, but a problem in
      locomotive engineering. The flying machine was a locomotive appliance,
      designed not merely to lift a weight, but to transport it elsewhere, a
      fact which should be sufficiently obvious. Nevertheless one of the leading
      scientific men of the day advocated a type in which this, the main
      function of the flying machine, was overlooked. When the machine was
      considered as a method of transport, the vertical screw type, or
      helicopter, became at once ridiculous. It had, nevertheless, many
      advocates who had some vague and ill-defined notion of subsequent motion
      through the air after the weight was raised.
    

      Helicopter Type Useless.
    

      When efficiency of transport was demanded, the helicopter type was
      entirely out of court. Almost all of its advocates neglected the effect of
      the motion of the machine through the air on the efficiency of the
      vertical screws. They either assumed that the motion was so slow as not to
      matter, or that a patch of still air accompanied the machine in its
      flight. Only one form of this type had any possibility of success. In this
      there were two screws running on inclined axles—one on each side of
      the weight to be lifted. The action of such inclined screw was curious,
      and in a previous lecture he had pointed out that it was almost exactly
      the same as that of a bird's wing. In high-speed racing craft such
      inclined screws were of necessity often used, but it was at a sacrifice of
      their efficiency. In any case the efficiency of the inclined-screw
      helicopter could not compare with that of an aeroplane, and that type
      might be dismissed from consideration so soon as efficiency became the
      ruling factor of the design.
    

      Must Compete With Locomotive.
    

      To justify itself the aeroplane must compete, in some regard or other,
      with other locomotive appliances, performing one or more of the purposes
      of locomotion more efficiently than existing systems. It would be no use
      unless able to stem air currents, so that its velocity must be greater
      than that of the worst winds liable to be encountered. To illustrate the
      limitations imposed on the motion of an aeroplane by wind velocity, Mr.
      Lanchester gave the diagrams shown in Figs. 1 to 4. The circle in each
      case was, he said, described with a radius equal to the speed of the
      aeroplane in still air, from a center placed "down-wind" from the
      aeroplane by an amount equal to the velocity of the wind.
    

      Fig. 1 therefore represented the case in which the air was still, and in
      this case the aeroplane represented by A had perfect liberty of
      movement in any direction
    

      In Fig. 2 the velocity of the wind was half that of the aeroplane, and the
      latter could still navigate in any direction, but its speed against the
      wind was only one-third of its speed with the wind.
    

      In Fig. 3 the velocity of the wind was equal to that of the aeroplane, and
      then motion against the wind was impossible; but it could move to any
      point of the circle, but not to any point lying to the left of the tangent
      A B. Finally, when the wind had a greater speed than the
      aeroplane, as in Fig. 4, the machine could move only in directions limited
      by the tangents A C and A D.
    

      Matter of Fuel Consumption.
    

      Taking the case in which the wind had a speed equal to half that of the
      aeroplane, Mr. Lanchester said that for a given journey out and home, down
      wind and back, the aeroplane would require 30 per cent more fuel than if
      the trip were made in still air; while if the journey was made at right
      angles to the direction of the wind the fuel needed would be 15 per cent
      more than in a calm. This 30 per cent extra was quite a heavy enough
      addition to the fuel; and to secure even this figure it was necessary that
      the aeroplane should have a speed of twice that of the maximum wind in
      which it was desired to operate the machine. Again, as stated in the last
      lecture, to insure the automatic stability of the machine it was necessary
      that the aeroplane speed should be largely in excess of that of the gusts
      of wind liable to be encountered.
    

      Eccentricities of the Wind.
    

      There was, Mr. Lanchester said, a loose connection between the average
      velocity of the wind and the maximum speed of the gusts. When the average
      speed of the wind was 40 miles per hour, that of the gusts might be equal
      or more. At one moment there might be a calm or the direction of the wind
      even reversed, followed, the next moment, by a violent gust. About the
      same minimum speed was desirable for security against gusts as was
      demanded by other considerations. Sixty miles an hour was the least figure
      desirable in an aeroplane, and this should be exceeded as much as
      possible. Actually, the Wright machine had a speed of 38 miles per hour,
      while Farman's Voisin machine flew at 45 miles per hour.
    

      Both machines were extremely sensitive to high winds, and the speaker, in
      spite of newspaper reports to the contrary, had never seen either flown in
      more than a gentle breeze. The damping out of the oscillations of the
      flight path, discussed in the last lecture, increased with the fourth
      power of the natural velocity of flight, and rapid damping formed the
      easiest, and sometimes the only, defense against dangerous oscillations. A
      machine just stable at 35 miles per hour would have reasonably rapid
      damping if its speed were increased to 60 miles per hour.
    

      Thinks Use Is Limited.
    

      It was, the lecturer proceeded, inconceivable that any very extended use
      should be made of the aeroplane unless the speed was much greater than
      that of the motor car. It might in special cases be of service, apart from
      this increase of speed, as in the exploration of countries destitute of
      roads, but it would have no general utility. With an automobile averaging
      25 to 35 miles per hour, almost any part of Europe, Russia excepted, was
      attainable in a day's journey. A flying machine of but equal speed would
      have no advantages, but if the speed could be raised to 90 or 100 miles
      per hour, the whole continent of Europe would become a playground, every
      part being within a daylight flight of Berlin. Further, some marine craft
      now had speeds of 40 miles per hour, and efficiently to follow up and
      report movements of such vessels an aeroplane should travel at 60 miles
      per hour at least. Hence from all points of view appeared the imperative
      desirability of very high velocities of flight. The difficulties of
      achievement were, however, great.
    

      Weight of Lightest Motors.
    

      As shown in the first lecture of his course, the resistance to motion was
      nearly independent of the velocity, so that the total work done in
      transporting a given weight was nearly constant. Hence the question of
      fuel economy was not a bar to high velocities of flight, though should
      these become excessive, the body resistance might constitute a large
      proportion of the total. The horsepower required varied as the velocity,
      so the factor governing the maximum velocity of flight was the horsepower
      that could be developed on a given weight. At present the weight per
      horsepower of feather-weight motors appeared to range from 2 1/4 pounds up
      to 7 pounds per brake horsepower, some actual figures being as follows:
    

         Antoinette........ 5 lbs.
         Fiat.............. 3 lbs.
         Gnome....... Under 3 lbs.
         Metallurgic....... 8 lbs.
         Renault........... 7 lbs.
         Wright.............6 lbs.


      Automobile engines, on the other hand, commonly weighed 12 pounds to 13
      pounds per brake horsepower.
    

      For short flights fuel economy was of less importance than a saving in the
      weight of the engine. For long flights, however, the case was different.
      Thus, if the gasolene consumption was 1/2 pound per horsepower hour, and
      the engine weighed 3 pounds per brake horsepower, the fuel needed for a
      six-hour flight would weigh as much as the engine, but for half an hour's
      flight its weight would be unimportant.
    

      Best Means of Propulsion.
    

      The best method of propulsion was by the screw, which acting in air was
      subject to much the same conditions as obtained in marine work. Its
      efficiency depended on its diameter and pitch and on its position, whether
      in front of or behind the body propelled. From this theory of dynamic
      support, Mr. Lanchester proceeded, the efficiency of each element of a
      screw propeller could be represented by curves such as were given in his
      first lecture before the society, and from these curves the over-all
      efficiency of any proposed propeller could be computed, by mere
      inspection, with a fair degree of accuracy. These curves showed that the
      tips of long-bladed propellers were inefficient, as was also the portion
      of the blade near the root. In actual marine practice the blade from boss
      to tip was commonly of such a length that the over-all efficiency was 95
      per cent of that of the most efficient element of it.
    

      Advocates Propellers in Rear.
    

      From these curves the diameter and appropriate pitch of a screw could be
      calculated, and the number of revolutions was then fixed. Thus, for a
      speed of 80 feet per second the pitch might come out as 8 feet, in which
      case the revolutions would be 600 per minute, which might, however, be too
      low for the motor. It was then necessary either to gear down the
      propeller, as was done in the Wright machine, or, if it was decided to
      drive it direct, to sacrifice some of the efficiency of the propeller. An
      analogous case arose in the application of the steam turbine to the
      propulsion of cargo boats, a problem as yet unsolved. The propeller should
      always be aft, so that it could abstract energy from the wake current, and
      also so that its wash was clear of the body propelled. The best possible
      efficiency was about 70 per cent, and it was safe to rely upon 66 per
      cent.
    

      Benefits of Soaring Flight.
    

      There was, Mr. Lanchester proceeded, some possibility of the aeronaut
      reducing the power needed for transport by his adopting the principle of
      soaring flight, as exemplified by some birds. There were, he continued,
      two different modes of soaring flight. In the one the bird made use of the
      upward current of air often to be found in the neighborhood of steep
      vertical cliffs. These cliffs deflected the air upward long before it
      actually reached the cliff, a whole region below being thus the seat of an
      upward current. Darwin has noted that the condor was only to be found in
      the neighborhood of such cliffs. Along the south coast also the gulls made
      frequent use of the up currents due to the nearly perpendicular chalk
      cliffs along the shore.
    

      In the tropics up currents were also caused by temperature differences.
      Cumulus clouds, moreover, were nearly always the terminations of such up
      currents of heated air, which, on cooling by expansion in the upper
      regions, deposited their moisture as fog. These clouds might, perhaps,
      prove useful in the future in showing the aeronaut where up currents were
      to be found. Another mode of soaring flight was that adopted by the
      albatross, which took advantage of the fact that the air moved in
      pulsations, into which the bird fitted itself, being thus able to extract
      energy from the wind. Whether it would be possible for the aeronaut to
      employ a similar method must be left to the future to decide.
    

      Main Difficulties in Aviation.
    

      In practical flight difficulties arose in starting and in alighting. There
      was a lower limit to the speed at which the machine was stable, and it was
      inadvisable to leave the ground till this limit was attained. Similarly,
      in alighting it was inexpedient to reduce the speed below the limit of
      stability. This fact constituted a difficulty in the adoption of high
      speeds, since the length of run needed increased in proportion to the
      square of the velocity. This drawback could, however, be surmounted by
      forming starting and alighting grounds of ample size. He thought it quite
      likely in the future that such grounds would be considered as essential to
      the flying machine as a seaport was to an ocean-going steamer or as a road
      was to the automobile.
    

      Requisites of Flying Machine.
    

      Flying machines were commonly divided into monoplanes and biplanes,
      according as they had one or two supporting surfaces. The distinction was
      not, however, fundamental. To get the requisite strength some form of
      girder framework was necessary, and it was a mere question of convenience
      whether the supporting surface was arranged along both the top and the
      bottom of this girder, or along the bottom only. The framework adopted
      universally was of wood braced by ties of pianoforte wire, an arrangement
      giving the stiffness desired with the least possible weight. Some kind of
      chassis was also necessary.
    


 








      CHAPTER XXIII. AMATEURS MAY USE WRIGHT PATENTS.
    

      Owing to the fact that the Wright brothers have enjoined a number of
      professional aviators from using their system of control, amateurs have
      been slow to adopt it. They recognize its merits, and would like to use
      the system, but have been apprehensive that it might involve them in
      litigation. There is no danger of this, as will be seen by the following
      statement made by the Wrights:
    

      What Wright Brothers Say.
    

      "Any amateur, any professional who is not exhibiting for money, is at
      liberty to use our patented devices. We shall be glad to have them do so,
      and there will be no interference on our part, by legal action, or
      otherwise. The only men we proceed against are those who, without our
      permission, without even asking our consent, coolly appropriate the
      results of our labors and use them for the purpose of making money.
      Curtiss, Delagrange, Voisin, and all the rest of them who have used our
      devices have done so in money-making exhibitions. So long as there is any
      money to be made by the use of the products of our brains, we propose to
      have it ourselves. It is the only way in which we can get any return for
      the years of patient work we have given to the problem of aviation. On the
      other hand, any man who wants to use these devices for the purpose of
      pleasure, or the advancement of science, is welcome to do so, without
      money and without price. This is fair enough, is it not?"
    

      Basis of the Wright Patents.
    

      In a flying machine a normally flat aeroplane having lateral marginal
      portions capable of movement to different positions above or below the
      normal plane of the body of the aeroplane, such movement being about an
      axis transverse to the line of flight, whereby said lateral marginal
      portions may be moved to different angles relatively to the normal plane
      of the body of the aeroplane, so as to present to the atmosphere different
      angles of incidence, and means for so moving said lateral marginal
      portions, substantially as described.
    

      Application of vertical struts near the ends having flexible joints.
    

      Means for simultaneously imparting such movement to said lateral portions
      to different angles relatively to each other.
    

      Refers to the movement of the lateral portions on the same side to the
      same angle.
    

      Means for simultaneously moving vertical rudder so as to present to the
      wind that side thereof nearest the side of the aeroplane having the
      smallest angle of incidence.
    

      Lateral stability is obtained by warping the end wings by moving the lever
      at the right hand of the operator, connection being made by wires from the
      lever to the wing tips. The rudder may also be curved or warped in similar
      manner by lever action.
    

      Wrights Obtain an Injunction.
    

      In January, 1910, Judge Hazel, of the United States Circuit Court, granted
      a preliminary injunction restraining the Herring-Curtiss Co., and Glenn H.
      Curtiss, from manufacturing, selling, or using for exhibition purposes the
      machine known as the Curtiss aeroplane. The injunction was obtained on the
      ground that the Curtiss machine is an infringement upon the Wright patents
      in the matter of wing warping and rudder control.
    

      It is not the purpose of the authors to discuss the subject pro or con.
      Such discussion would have no proper place in a volume of this kind. It is
      enough to say that Curtiss stoutly insists that his machine is not an
      infringement of the Wright patents, although Judge Hazel evidently thinks
      differently.
    

      What the Judge Said.
    

      In granting the preliminary injunction the judge said:
    

      "Defendants claim generally that the difference in construction of their
      apparatus causes the equilibrium or lateral balance to be maintained and
      its aerial movement secured upon an entirely different principle from that
      of complainant; the defendants' aeroplanes are curved, firmly attached to
      the stanchions and hence are incapable of twisting or turning in any
      direction; that the supplementary planes or so-called rudders are secured
      to the forward stanchion at the extreme lateral ends of the planes and are
      adjusted midway between the upper and lower planes with the margins
      extending beyond the edges; that in moving the supplementary planes equal
      and uniform angles of incidence are presented as distinguished from
      fluctuating angles of incidence. Such claimed functional effects, however,
      are strongly contradicted by the expert witness for complainant.
    

      Similar to Plan of Wrights.
    

      "Upon this contention it is sufficient to say that the affidavits for the
      complainant so clearly define the principle of operation of the flying
      machines in question that I am reasonably satisfied that there is a
      variableness of the angle of incidence in the machine of defendants which
      is produced when a supplementary plane on one side is tilted or raised and
      the other stimultaneously tilted or lowered. I am also satisfied that the
      rear rudder is turned by the operator to the side having the least angle
      of incidence and that such turning is done at the time the supplementary
      planes are raised or depressed to prevent tilting or upsetting the
      machine. On the papers presented I incline to the view, as already
      indicated, that the claims of the patent in suit should be broadly
      construed; and when given such construction, the elements of the Wright
      machine are found in defendants' machine performing the same functional
      result. There are dissimilarities in the defendants' structure—changes
      of form and strengthening of parts—which may be improvements, but
      such dissimilarities seem to me to have no bearing upon the means adopted
      to preserve the equilibrium, which means are the equivalent of the claims
      in suit and attain an identical result.
    

      Variance From Patent Immaterial.
    

      "Defendants further contend that the curved or arched surfaces of the
      Wright aeroplanes in commercial use are departures from the patent, which
      describes 'substantially flat surfaces,' and that such a construction
      would be wholly impracticable. The drawing, Fig. 3, however, attached to
      the specification, shows a curved line inward of the aeroplane with
      straight lateral edges, and considering such drawing with the terminology
      of the specification, the slight arching of the surface is not thought a
      material departure; at any rate, the patent in issue does not belong to
      the class of patents which requires narrowing to the details of
      construction."
    

      "June Bug" First Infringement.
    

      Referring to the matter of priority, the judge said:
    

      "Indeed, no one interfered with the rights of the patentees by
      constructing machines similar to theirs until in July, 1908, when Curtiss
      exhibited a flying machine which he called the 'June Bug.' He was
      immediately notified by the patentees that such machine with its movable
      surfaces at the tips of wings infringed the patent in suit, and he replied
      that he did not intend to publicly exhibit the machine for profit, but
      merely was engaged in exhibiting it for scientific purposes as a member of
      the Aerial Experiment Association. To this the patentees did not object.
      Subsequently, however, the machine, with supplementary planes placed
      midway between the upper and lower aeroplanes, was publicly exhibited by
      the defendant corporation and used by Curtiss in aerial flights for prizes
      and emoluments. It further appears that the defendants now threaten to
      continue such use for gain and profit, and to engage in the manufacture
      and sale of such infringing machines, thereby becoming an active rival of
      complainant in the business of constructing flying machines embodying the
      claims in suit, but such use of the infringing machines it is the duty of
      this court, on the papers presented, to enjoin.
    

      "The requirements in patent causes for the issuance of an injunction
      pendente lite—the validity of the patent, general acquiescence by
      the public and infringement by the defendants—are so reasonably
      clear that I believe if not probable the complainant may succeed at final
      hearing, and therefore, status quo should be preserved and a preliminary
      injunction granted.
    

      "So ordered."
    

      Points Claimed By Curtiss.
    

      That the Herring-Curtiss Co. will appeal is a certainty. Mr. Emerson R.
      Newell, counsel for the company, states its case as follows:
    

      "The Curtiss machine has two main supporting surfaces, both of which are
      curved * * * and are absolutely rigid at all times and cannot be moved,
      warped or distorted in any manner. The front horizontal rudder is used for
      the steering up or down, and the rear vertical rudder is used only for
      steering to the right or left, in the same manner as a boat is steered by
      its rudder. The machine is provided at the rear with a fixed horizontal
      surface, which is not present in the machine of the patent, and which has
      a distinct advantage in the operation of defendants' machine, as will be
      hereafter discussed.
    

      Does Not Warp Main Surface.
    

      "Defendants' machine does not use the warping of the main supporting
      surfaces in restoring the lateral equilibrium, but has two comparatively
      small pivoted balancing surfaces or rudders. When one end of the machine
      is tipped up or down from the normal, these planes may be thrown in
      opposite directions by the operator, and so steer each end of the machine
      up or down to its normal level, at which time tension upon them is
      released and they are moved back by the pressure of the wind to their
      normal position.
    

      Rudder Used Only For Steering.
    

      "When defendants' balancing surfaces are moved they present equal angles
      of incidence to the normal rush of air and equal resistances, at each side
      of the machine, and there is therefore no tendency to turn around a
      vertical axis as is the case of the machine of the patent, consequently no
      reason or necessity for turning the vertical rear rudder in defendants'
      machine to counteract any such turning tendency. At any rate, whatever may
      be the theories in regard to this matter, the fact is that the operator of
      defendants' machine does not at any time turn his vertical rudder to
      counteract any turning tendency clue to the side balancing surfaces, but
      only uses it to steer the machine the same as a boat is steered."
    

      Aero Club Recognizes Wrights.
    

      The Aero Club of America has officially recognized the Wright patents.
      This course was taken following a conference held April 9th, 1910,
      participated in by William Wright and Andrew Freedman, representing the
      Wright Co., and the Aero Club's committee, of Philip T. Dodge, W. W.
      Miller, L. L. Gillespie, Wm. H. Page and Cortlandt F. Bishop.
    

      At this meeting arrangements were made by which the Aero Club recognizes
      the Wright patents and will not give its section to any open meet where
      the promoters thereof have not secured a license from the Wright Company.
    

      The substance of the agreement was that the Aero Club of America
      recognizes the rights of the owners of the Wright patents under the
      decisions of the Federal courts and refuses to countenance the
      infringement of those patents as long as these decisions remain in force.
    

      In the meantime, in order to encourage aviation, both at home and abroad,
      and in order to permit foreign aviators to take part in aviation contests
      in this country it was agreed that the Aero Club of America, as the
      American representative of the International Aeronautic Federation, should
      approve only such public contests as may be licensed by the Wright Company
      and that the Wright Company, on the other hand, should encourage the
      holding of open meets or contests where ever approved as aforesaid by the
      Aero Club of America by granting licenses to promoters who make
      satisfactory arrangements with the company for its compensation for the
      use of its patents. At such licensed meet any machine of any make may
      participate freely without securing any further license or permit. The
      details and terms of all meets will be arranged by the committee having in
      charge the interests of both organizations.