CHAPTER XII. HOW TO USE THE MACHINE.
It is a mistaken idea that flying machines must be operated at extreme
      altitudes. True, under the impetus of handsome prizes, and the incentive
      to advance scientific knowledge, professional aviators have ascended to
      considerable heights, flights at from 500 to 1,500 feet being now common
      with such experts as Farman, Bleriot, Latham, Paulhan, Wright and Curtiss.
      The altitude record at this time is about 4,165 feet, held by Paulhan.
One of the instructions given by experienced aviators to pupils, and for
      which they insist upon implicit obeyance, is: "If your machine gets more
      than 30 feet high, or comes closer to the ground than 6 feet, descend at
      once." Such men as Wright and Curtiss will not tolerate a violation of
      this rule. If their instructions are not strictly complied with they
      decline to give the offender further lessons.
Why This Rule Prevails.
There is good reason for this precaution. The higher the altitude the more
      rarefied (thinner) becomes the air, and the less sustaining power it has.
      Consequently the more difficult it becomes to keep in suspension a given
      weight. When sailing within 30 feet of the ground sustentation is
      comparatively easy and, should a fall occur, the results are not likely to
      be serious. On the other hand, sailing too near the ground is almost as
      objectionable in many ways as getting up too high. If the craft is
      navigated too close to the ground trees, shrubs, fences and other
      obstructions are liable to be encountered. There is also the handicap of
      contrary air currents diverted by the obstructions referred to, and which
      will be explained more fully further on.
How to Make a Start.
Taking it for granted that the beginner has familiarized himself with the
      manipulation of the machine, and especially the control mechanism, the
      next thing in order is an actual flight. It is probable that his machine
      will be equipped with a wheeled alighting gear, as the skids used by the
      Wrights necessitate the use of a special starting track. In this respect
      the wheeled machine is much easier to handle so far as novices are
      concerned as it may be easily rolled to the trial grounds. This, as in the
      case of the initial experiments, should be a clear, reasonably level
      place, free from trees, fences, rocks and similar obstructions with which
      there may be danger of colliding.
The beginner will need the assistance of three men. One of these should
      take his position in the rear of the machine, and one at each end. On
      reaching the trial ground the aviator takes his seat in the machine and,
      while the men at the ends hold it steady the one in the rear assists in
      retaining it until the operator is ready. In the meantime the aviator has
      started his motor. Like the glider the flying machine, in order to
      accomplish the desired results, should be headed into the wind.
When the Machine Rises.
Under the impulse of the pushing movement, and assisted by the motor
      action, the machine will gradually rise from the ground—provided it
      has been properly proportioned and put together, and everything is in
      working order. This is the time when the aviator requires a cool head, At
      a modest distance from the ground use the control lever to bring the
      machine on a horizontal level and overcome the tendency to rise. The exact
      manipulation of this lever depends upon the method of control adopted, and
      with this the aviator is supposed to have thoroughly familiarized himself
      as previously advised in Chapter XI.
It is at this juncture that the operator must act promptly, but with the
      perfect composure begotten of confidence. One of the great drawbacks in
      aviation by novices is the tendency to become rattled, and this is much
      more prevalent than one might suppose, even among men who, under other
      conditions, are cool and confident in their actions.
There is something in the sensation of being suddenly lifted from the
      ground, and suspended in the air that is disconcerting at the start, but
      this will soon wear off if the experimenter will keep cool. A few
      successful flights no matter how short they may be, will put a lot of
      confidence into him.
Make Your Flights Short.
Be modest in your initial flights. Don't attempt to match the records of
      experienced men who have devoted years to mastering the details of
      aviation. Paulhan, Farman, Bleriot, Wright, Curtiss, and all the rest of
      them began, and practiced for years, in the manner here described, being
      content to make just a little advancement at each attempt. A flight of 150
      feet, cleanly and safely made, is better as a beginning than one of 400
      yards full of bungling mishaps.
And yet these latter have their uses, provided the operator is of a
      discerning mind and can take advantage of them as object lessons. But, it
      is not well to invite them. They will occur frequently enough under the
      most favorable conditions, and it is best to have them come later when the
      feeling of trepidation and uncertainty as to what to do has worn off.
Above all, don't attempt to fly too high. Keep within a reasonable
      distance from the ground—about 25 or 30 feet. This advice is not
      given solely to lessen the risk of serious accident in case of collapse,
      but mainly because it will assist to instill confidence in the operator.
It is comparatively easy to learn to swim in shallow water, but the
      knowledge that one is tempting death in deep water begets timidity.
Preserving the Equilibrium.
After learning how to start and stop, to ascend and descend, the next
      thing to master is the art of preserving equilibrium, the knack of keeping
      the machine perfectly level in the air—on an "even keel," as a
      sailor would say. This simile is particularly appropriate as all aviators
      are in reality sailors, and much more daring ones than those who course
      the seas. The latter are in craft which are kept afloat by the buoyancy of
      the water, whether in motion or otherwise and, so long as normal
      conditions prevail, will not sink. Aviators sail the air in craft in which
      constant motion must be maintained in order to ensure flotation.
The man who has ridden a bicycle or motorcycle around curves at anything
      like high speed, will have a very good idea as to the principle of
      maintaining equilibrium in an airship. He knows that in rounding curves
      rapidly there is a marked tendency to change the direction of the motion
      which will result in an upset unless he overcomes it by an inclination of
      his body in an opposite direction. This is why we see racers lean well
      over when taking the curves. It simply must be done to preserve the
      equilibrium and avoid a spill.
How It Works In the Air.
If the equilibrium of an airship is disturbed to an extent which
      completely overcomes the center of gravity it falls according to the
      location of the displacement. If this displacement, for instance, is at
      either end the apparatus falls endways; if it is to the front or rear, the
      fall is in the corresponding direction.
Owing to uncertain air currents—the air is continually shifting and
      eddying, especially within a hundred feet or so of the earth—the
      equilibrium of an airship is almost constantly being disturbed to some
      extent. Even if this disturbance is not serious enough to bring on a fall
      it interferes with the progress of the machine, and should be overcome at
      once. This is one of the things connected with aerial navigation which
      calls for prompt, intelligent action.
Frequently, when the displacement is very slight, it may be overcome, and
      the craft immediately righted by a mere shifting of the operator's body.
      Take, for illustration, a case in which the extreme right end of the
      machine becomes lowered a trifle from the normal level. It is possible to
      bring it back into proper position by leaning over to the left far enough
      to shift the weight to the counter-balancing point. The same holds good as
      to minor front or rear displacements.
When Planes Must Be Used.
There are other displacements, however, and these are the most frequent,
      which can be only overcome by manipulation of the stabilizing planes. The
      method of procedure depends upon the form of machine in use. The Wright
      machine, as previously explained, is equipped with plane ends which are so
      contrived as to admit of their being warped (position changed) by means of
      the lever control. These flexible tip planes move simultaneously, but in
      opposite directions. As those on one end rise, those on the other end fall
      below the level of the main plane. By this means air is displaced at one
      point, and an increased amount secured in another.
This may seem like a complicated system, but its workings are simple when
      once understood. It is by the manipulation or warping of these flexible
      tips that transverse stability is maintained, and any tendency to
      displacement endways is overcome. Longitudinal stability is governed by
      means of the front rudder.
Stabilizing planes of some form are a feature, and a necessary feature, on
      all flying machines, but the methods of application and manipulation vary
      according to the individual ideas of the inventors. They all tend,
      however, toward the same end—the keeping of the machine perfectly
      level when being navigated in the air.
When to Make a Flight.
A beginner should never attempt to make a flight when a strong wind is
      blowing. The fiercer the wind, the more likely it is to be gusty and
      uncertain, and the more difficult it will be to control the machine. Even
      the most experienced and daring of aviators find there is a limit to wind
      speed against which they dare not compete. This is not because they lack
      courage, but have the sense to realize that it would be silly and useless.
The novice will find a comparatively still day, or one when the wind is
      blowing at not to exceed 15 miles an hour, the best for his experiments.
      The machine will be more easily controlled, the trip will be safer, and
      also cheaper as the consumption of fuel increases with the speed of the
      wind against which the aeroplane is forced.