NOTABLE CROSS-COUNTRY FLIGHTS OF 1911.
One of the important features of 1911 in aviation was the rapid increase
      in the number and distance of cross-country flights made either for the
      purpose of exhibition, testing, instruction or pleasure. Flights between
      cities in almost every country of the world became common occurrences. So
      great was the number that only those of more than ordinary importance
      because of speed, distance or duration are recorded. The flights of Harry
      N. Atwood from Boston to Washington and from St. Louis to New York, and C.
      P. Rodgers from New York to Los Angeles were the most important events of
      the kind in this country. The St Louis to New York flight was a distance
      by air route, 1,266 miles. Duration of flight, 12 days. Net flying time,
      28 hours 53 minutes. Average daily flight, 105.5 miles. Average speed,
      43.9 miles per hour.
Transcontinental Flight of Calbraith P. Rodgers.—All world records
      for cross-country flying were broken during the New York to Los Angeles
      flight of Calbraith P. Rodgers, who left Sheepshead Bay, N. Y., on Sunday,
      September 17, 1911, and completed his flight to the Pacific Coast on
      Sunday, November 5, at Pasadena, Cal. Rodgers flew a Wright biplane, and
      during his long trip the machine was repeatedly repaired, so great was the
      strain of the long journey in the air. Rodgers is estimated to have
      covered 4,231 miles, although the actual route as mapped out was but 4,017
      miles. Elapsed time to Pasadena, Cal., 49 days; actual time in the air,
      4,924 minutes, equivalent to 3 days 10 hours 4 minutes; average speed
      approximating 51 miles per hour. Rodgers' longest flight in one day was
      from Sanderson to Sierra Blanca, Texas, on October 28, when he covered 231
      miles. On November 12, Rodgers fell at Compton, Cal., and was badly
      injured, causing a delay of 28 days.
European Circuit Race.—Started from Paris on June 18, 1911.
      Distance, 1,073 miles, via Paris to Liege; Liege to Spa to Liege; Liege to
      Utrecht, Holland; Utrecht to Brussels, Belgium; Brussels to Roubaix;
      Roubaix to Calais; Calais to London; London to Calais and Calais to Paris.
      Three aeronauts were killed either at the start or shortly after the race
      was in progress. They were Capt. Princetau, M. Le Martin and M. Lendron.
      Three others were injured by falls. Seven hundred thousand spectators
      witnessed the start from the aviation field at Vincennes, near Paris.
      There were more than forty starters, of which eight finished. The winner,
      Lieut. Jean Conneau, who flies under the name of "Andre Beaumont,"
      completed the circuit on July 7; his actual net flying time for the
      distance being 58h. 38m. 4-5s.
Circuit of England Race—1,010 Miles in Five Sections.—
Start, July 22. Finish, July 26. Prize, $50,000. Twenty-eight entries and
      eighteen starters. Seventeen finished the first section from Brooklands to
      Hendon, a distance of twenty miles. Five reached Edinburgh, the second
      section, a distance of 343 miles, and four completed the entire circuit.
Paris to Madrid Race.—This race was started at the Paris aviation
      held at Issy-les-Moulineaux on Sunday, May 21. There were twenty-one
      entrants, and fully 300,000 spectators gathered to witness the initial
      flight of the aerial races. The race was divided into three stages as
      follows: Paris to Angouleme, 248 miles; Angouleme to St. Sebastian, 208
      miles, and from St. Sebastian to Madrid, 386 miles, a total distance of
      842 miles. After three of the entrants had safely left the field, Aviator
      Train lost control of his plane, and in falling struck and killed M.
      Berteaux, the French Minister of War, and seriously injured Premier Monis.
      The accident caused the withdrawal of all but six of the original
      entrants, and of these but one finished. The race called for a flight over
      the Pyrenees Mountains, and Vedrines, the winner, had to rise to a height
      of more than 7,000 feet to pass the mountain barrier near Somosierra Pass.
      Both Vedrines and Gibert, another competitor, were attacked by eagles
      during the latter stages of the flight. Vedrines, who started from Paris
      on Monday, May 22, finished the long and perilous race at 8:06 a. m.
      Friday, May 26. Vedrines net flying time, all controls and enforced stops
      subtracted, was 14h. 55m. 18s. The various prizes to the winner aggregated
      $30,000.
The Paris-Rome-Turin Race.—The conditions of this race called for a
      flight between the cities of Paris, Rome and Turin, covering a distance of
      1,300 miles. The aviators were permitted by the rules to alight whenever
      and wherever they desired and the time limit was set from May 28 to June
      15. A prize of $100,000 was offered the winner, but the contest was never
      finished, as one after another the aviators dropped out until Frey fell
      near Roncigilione, France, breaking both arms and legs and unofficially
      ending the contest. There were twenty-one entries and twelve actual
      starters.
International Speed Cup Race.—The third annual international James
      Gordon Bennett speed cup race was held at Eastchurch, England, on July 1,
      1911, and for the second time was won by an American aviator, C. T.
      Weymann, in a French racing aeroplane. The distance was 150 kilometres
      equivalent to 94 miles, and the winner's time of 1h. 11m. 36s. showed an
      average speed of 78.77 miles per hour. The first race was held in 1909 and
      was won by Glenn Curtiss, who flew the twenty kilometres (12.4 miles) in
      15 minutes 50 2-5 seconds at an average speed of 47 miles per hour. In
      1910 the winner was Grahame-White, who covered 100 kilometres (62 miles)
      at Belmont Park, L. I., in 60 minutes 47 3-5 seconds, an average speed of
      61.3 miles per hour. In the 1911 race there were six starters: three from
      France, two from Great Britain and one from the United States.
Milan to Turin to Milan Race.—This race which was started from
      Milan, Italy, on October 29, was restricted to Italian aviators and had
      six starters. The distance was approximately 177 miles and won by
      Manissero in a Bleriot machine in 3h. 16m. 2 4-5s.
New York to Philadelphia Race.—The first intercity aeroplane race
      ever held in the United States was started from New York City on August 5,
      and finished in Philadelphia the same day. The prize of $5,000 was offered
      by a commercial concern with stores in the two cities: Three entrants
      competed from the Curtiss Exhibition Company. The distance was
      approximately 83 miles and won by L. Beachey in a Curtiss machine in 1h.
      50m. at an average speed of 45 miles per hour.
Tri-State Race.—The tri-state race was the feature event of the
      Harvard Aviation Society meet held at Squantum, Mass., August 26 to
      September 6. It was held Labor Day, September 4, over a course of 174
      miles, from Boston to Nashua to Worcester to Providence to Boston. Four
      competitors started, of which two finished, the winner, E. Ovington, in a
      Bleriot machine. Ovington's net flying time, 3h. 6m. 22 1-5s. Winner's
      prize, $10,000.
AEROPLANES AND DIRIGIBLE BALLOONS IN WARFARE.
Wonderful progress has been made in the development of the aeroplane in
      this country and in Europe since 1903, and within the last two or three
      years the leading powers of the world have entered upon extensive tests
      and experiments to determine its availability and usefulness in land and
      naval warfare.
At the present time all the great powers are building or purchasing
      aeroplanes on an extensive scale. They have established government schools
      for the instruction of their army and navy officers and for experimental
      work. So-called "Airship Fleets" have been constructed and placed in
      commission as auxiliaries to the armies and navies. The fleets of France
      and Germany are about equal and are larger by far than those of any of the
      other powers. The length of the dirigibles composing these fleets runs
      from 150 to 500 feet; they are equipped with engines of from 50 to 500
      horse-power, with a rate of speed ranging from 20 to 30 miles per hour.
      Their approximate range is from 200 to 900 miles; the longest actual run
      (made by the Zeppelin II, Germany) is 800 miles.
A British naval airship, one of the largest yet built, was completed last
      summer. It has cost over $200,000, and it was in course of designing and
      construction two years. It is 510 feet long; can carry 22 persons, and has
      a lift of 21 tons.
The relative value of the dirigible balloon and the aeroplane in actual
      war is yet to be determined. The dirigible is considered to be the safer,
      yet several large balloons of this class in Germany and France have met
      with disaster, involving loss of lives. The capacity of the dirigible for
      longer flights and its superior facilities for carrying apparatus and
      operators for wireless telegraphy are distinct advantages.
There has not yet been much opportunity to test the airship in actual
      warfare. The aeroplane has been used by the Italians in Tripoli for
      scouting and reconnoitering and is said to have justified expectations. On
      several occasions the Italian military aviators followed the movements of
      the enemy, in one instance as far as forty miles inland. At the time of
      the attack by the Turks a skillful aeroplane reconnaissance revealed the
      approach of a large Turkish force, believed to be at the time sixty miles
      away in the mountains.
Aeroplanes and airships, as they exist today, would doubtless render very
      valuable service in a time of war, both over land and water, in scouting,
      reconnoitering, carrying dispatches, and as some experts believe, in
      locating submarines and mines placed by the enemy in channels of exits
      from ports. A "coast aeroplane" could fly out 30 or 40 miles from land,
      and rising to a great height, descry any hostile ships on the distant
      horizon, observe their number, strength, formation and direction, and
      return within two hours with a report to obtain which would require
      several swift torpedo-boat destroyers and a much greater time. The
      question as to whether it would be practicable to bombard an enemy on land
      or sea with explosive bombs dropped or discharged from flying machines or
      airships, is one which is much discussed but hardly yet determined.
Aeroplanes have been constructed with floats in the place of runners and
      several attempts have been made, in some cases successfully, to light with
      them on and to rise from the water. Mr. Curtiss did this at San Francisco,
      in January, 1911. Attempts have also been made with the aeroplane to
      alight on and to take flight from the deck of a warship. Toward the end of
      1910 Aviator Ely flew to land from the cruiser Birmingham, and in January,
      1911, he flew from land and alighted on the cruiser Pennsylvania. But in
      these cases special arrangements were made which would be hardly
      practicable in a time of actual war.
In November, 1911, a test was made at Newport, R. I., by Lieut. Rodgers,
      of the navy, of a "hydro-areoplane" as an auxiliary to a battleship. The
      idea of the test was to alight alongside of the ship, hoist the machine
      aboard, put out to sea and launch the machine again with the use of a
      crane. Lieut. Rodgers came down smoothly alongside the Ohio, his machine
      was easily drawn aboard with a crane, and the Ohio steamed down to the
      open sea, where it was blowing half a gale. But, owing to the misjudgment
      of the ship's headway, one of the wings of the machine when it struck the
      water after being released from the crane, went under the water and was
      snapped off. Lieut. Rodgers was convinced that this method was too risky
      and that some other must be devised.