CHAPTER XXIII. AMATEURS MAY USE WRIGHT PATENTS.
Owing to the fact that the Wright brothers have enjoined a number of
      professional aviators from using their system of control, amateurs have
      been slow to adopt it. They recognize its merits, and would like to use
      the system, but have been apprehensive that it might involve them in
      litigation. There is no danger of this, as will be seen by the following
      statement made by the Wrights:
What Wright Brothers Say.
"Any amateur, any professional who is not exhibiting for money, is at
      liberty to use our patented devices. We shall be glad to have them do so,
      and there will be no interference on our part, by legal action, or
      otherwise. The only men we proceed against are those who, without our
      permission, without even asking our consent, coolly appropriate the
      results of our labors and use them for the purpose of making money.
      Curtiss, Delagrange, Voisin, and all the rest of them who have used our
      devices have done so in money-making exhibitions. So long as there is any
      money to be made by the use of the products of our brains, we propose to
      have it ourselves. It is the only way in which we can get any return for
      the years of patient work we have given to the problem of aviation. On the
      other hand, any man who wants to use these devices for the purpose of
      pleasure, or the advancement of science, is welcome to do so, without
      money and without price. This is fair enough, is it not?"
Basis of the Wright Patents.
In a flying machine a normally flat aeroplane having lateral marginal
      portions capable of movement to different positions above or below the
      normal plane of the body of the aeroplane, such movement being about an
      axis transverse to the line of flight, whereby said lateral marginal
      portions may be moved to different angles relatively to the normal plane
      of the body of the aeroplane, so as to present to the atmosphere different
      angles of incidence, and means for so moving said lateral marginal
      portions, substantially as described.
Application of vertical struts near the ends having flexible joints.
Means for simultaneously imparting such movement to said lateral portions
      to different angles relatively to each other.
Refers to the movement of the lateral portions on the same side to the
      same angle.
Means for simultaneously moving vertical rudder so as to present to the
      wind that side thereof nearest the side of the aeroplane having the
      smallest angle of incidence.
Lateral stability is obtained by warping the end wings by moving the lever
      at the right hand of the operator, connection being made by wires from the
      lever to the wing tips. The rudder may also be curved or warped in similar
      manner by lever action.
Wrights Obtain an Injunction.
In January, 1910, Judge Hazel, of the United States Circuit Court, granted
      a preliminary injunction restraining the Herring-Curtiss Co., and Glenn H.
      Curtiss, from manufacturing, selling, or using for exhibition purposes the
      machine known as the Curtiss aeroplane. The injunction was obtained on the
      ground that the Curtiss machine is an infringement upon the Wright patents
      in the matter of wing warping and rudder control.
It is not the purpose of the authors to discuss the subject pro or con.
      Such discussion would have no proper place in a volume of this kind. It is
      enough to say that Curtiss stoutly insists that his machine is not an
      infringement of the Wright patents, although Judge Hazel evidently thinks
      differently.
What the Judge Said.
In granting the preliminary injunction the judge said:
"Defendants claim generally that the difference in construction of their
      apparatus causes the equilibrium or lateral balance to be maintained and
      its aerial movement secured upon an entirely different principle from that
      of complainant; the defendants' aeroplanes are curved, firmly attached to
      the stanchions and hence are incapable of twisting or turning in any
      direction; that the supplementary planes or so-called rudders are secured
      to the forward stanchion at the extreme lateral ends of the planes and are
      adjusted midway between the upper and lower planes with the margins
      extending beyond the edges; that in moving the supplementary planes equal
      and uniform angles of incidence are presented as distinguished from
      fluctuating angles of incidence. Such claimed functional effects, however,
      are strongly contradicted by the expert witness for complainant.
Similar to Plan of Wrights.
"Upon this contention it is sufficient to say that the affidavits for the
      complainant so clearly define the principle of operation of the flying
      machines in question that I am reasonably satisfied that there is a
      variableness of the angle of incidence in the machine of defendants which
      is produced when a supplementary plane on one side is tilted or raised and
      the other stimultaneously tilted or lowered. I am also satisfied that the
      rear rudder is turned by the operator to the side having the least angle
      of incidence and that such turning is done at the time the supplementary
      planes are raised or depressed to prevent tilting or upsetting the
      machine. On the papers presented I incline to the view, as already
      indicated, that the claims of the patent in suit should be broadly
      construed; and when given such construction, the elements of the Wright
      machine are found in defendants' machine performing the same functional
      result. There are dissimilarities in the defendants' structure—changes
      of form and strengthening of parts—which may be improvements, but
      such dissimilarities seem to me to have no bearing upon the means adopted
      to preserve the equilibrium, which means are the equivalent of the claims
      in suit and attain an identical result.
Variance From Patent Immaterial.
"Defendants further contend that the curved or arched surfaces of the
      Wright aeroplanes in commercial use are departures from the patent, which
      describes 'substantially flat surfaces,' and that such a construction
      would be wholly impracticable. The drawing, Fig. 3, however, attached to
      the specification, shows a curved line inward of the aeroplane with
      straight lateral edges, and considering such drawing with the terminology
      of the specification, the slight arching of the surface is not thought a
      material departure; at any rate, the patent in issue does not belong to
      the class of patents which requires narrowing to the details of
      construction."
"June Bug" First Infringement.
Referring to the matter of priority, the judge said:
"Indeed, no one interfered with the rights of the patentees by
      constructing machines similar to theirs until in July, 1908, when Curtiss
      exhibited a flying machine which he called the 'June Bug.' He was
      immediately notified by the patentees that such machine with its movable
      surfaces at the tips of wings infringed the patent in suit, and he replied
      that he did not intend to publicly exhibit the machine for profit, but
      merely was engaged in exhibiting it for scientific purposes as a member of
      the Aerial Experiment Association. To this the patentees did not object.
      Subsequently, however, the machine, with supplementary planes placed
      midway between the upper and lower aeroplanes, was publicly exhibited by
      the defendant corporation and used by Curtiss in aerial flights for prizes
      and emoluments. It further appears that the defendants now threaten to
      continue such use for gain and profit, and to engage in the manufacture
      and sale of such infringing machines, thereby becoming an active rival of
      complainant in the business of constructing flying machines embodying the
      claims in suit, but such use of the infringing machines it is the duty of
      this court, on the papers presented, to enjoin.
"The requirements in patent causes for the issuance of an injunction
      pendente lite—the validity of the patent, general acquiescence by
      the public and infringement by the defendants—are so reasonably
      clear that I believe if not probable the complainant may succeed at final
      hearing, and therefore, status quo should be preserved and a preliminary
      injunction granted.
"So ordered."
Points Claimed By Curtiss.
That the Herring-Curtiss Co. will appeal is a certainty. Mr. Emerson R.
      Newell, counsel for the company, states its case as follows:
"The Curtiss machine has two main supporting surfaces, both of which are
      curved * * * and are absolutely rigid at all times and cannot be moved,
      warped or distorted in any manner. The front horizontal rudder is used for
      the steering up or down, and the rear vertical rudder is used only for
      steering to the right or left, in the same manner as a boat is steered by
      its rudder. The machine is provided at the rear with a fixed horizontal
      surface, which is not present in the machine of the patent, and which has
      a distinct advantage in the operation of defendants' machine, as will be
      hereafter discussed.
Does Not Warp Main Surface.
"Defendants' machine does not use the warping of the main supporting
      surfaces in restoring the lateral equilibrium, but has two comparatively
      small pivoted balancing surfaces or rudders. When one end of the machine
      is tipped up or down from the normal, these planes may be thrown in
      opposite directions by the operator, and so steer each end of the machine
      up or down to its normal level, at which time tension upon them is
      released and they are moved back by the pressure of the wind to their
      normal position.
Rudder Used Only For Steering.
"When defendants' balancing surfaces are moved they present equal angles
      of incidence to the normal rush of air and equal resistances, at each side
      of the machine, and there is therefore no tendency to turn around a
      vertical axis as is the case of the machine of the patent, consequently no
      reason or necessity for turning the vertical rear rudder in defendants'
      machine to counteract any such turning tendency. At any rate, whatever may
      be the theories in regard to this matter, the fact is that the operator of
      defendants' machine does not at any time turn his vertical rudder to
      counteract any turning tendency clue to the side balancing surfaces, but
      only uses it to steer the machine the same as a boat is steered."
Aero Club Recognizes Wrights.
The Aero Club of America has officially recognized the Wright patents.
      This course was taken following a conference held April 9th, 1910,
      participated in by William Wright and Andrew Freedman, representing the
      Wright Co., and the Aero Club's committee, of Philip T. Dodge, W. W.
      Miller, L. L. Gillespie, Wm. H. Page and Cortlandt F. Bishop.
At this meeting arrangements were made by which the Aero Club recognizes
      the Wright patents and will not give its section to any open meet where
      the promoters thereof have not secured a license from the Wright Company.
The substance of the agreement was that the Aero Club of America
      recognizes the rights of the owners of the Wright patents under the
      decisions of the Federal courts and refuses to countenance the
      infringement of those patents as long as these decisions remain in force.
In the meantime, in order to encourage aviation, both at home and abroad,
      and in order to permit foreign aviators to take part in aviation contests
      in this country it was agreed that the Aero Club of America, as the
      American representative of the International Aeronautic Federation, should
      approve only such public contests as may be licensed by the Wright Company
      and that the Wright Company, on the other hand, should encourage the
      holding of open meets or contests where ever approved as aforesaid by the
      Aero Club of America by granting licenses to promoters who make
      satisfactory arrangements with the company for its compensation for the
      use of its patents. At such licensed meet any machine of any make may
      participate freely without securing any further license or permit. The
      details and terms of all meets will be arranged by the committee having in
      charge the interests of both organizations.