CHAPTER XXIV. HINTS ON PROPELLER CONSTRUCTION.
Every professional aviator has his own ideas as to the design of the
      propeller, one of the most important features of flying-machine
      construction. While in many instances the propeller, at a casual glance,
      may appear to be identical, close inspection will develop the fact that in
      nearly every case some individual idea of the designer has been
      incorporated. Thus, two propellers of the two-bladed variety, while of the
      same general size as to length and width of blade, will vary greatly as to
      pitch and "twist" or curvature.
What the Designers Seek.
Every designer is seeking for the same result—the securing of the
      greatest possible thrust, or air displacement, with the least possible
      energy.
The angles of any screw propeller blade having a uniform or true pitch
      change gradually for every increased diameter. In order to give a
      reasonably clear explanation, it will be well to review in a primary way
      some of the definitions or terms used in connection with and applied to
      screw propellers.
Terms in General Use.
Pitch.—The term "pitch," as applied to a screw propeller, is the
      theoretical distance through which it would travel without slip in one
      revolution, and as applied to a propeller blade it is the angle at which
      the blades are set so as to enable them to travel in a spiral path through
      a fixed distance theoretically without slip in one revolution.
Pitch speed.—The term "pitch speed" of a screw propeller is the
      speed in feet multiplied by the number of revolutions it is caused to make
      in one minute of time. If a screw propeller is revolved 600 times per
      minute, and if its pitch is 7 ft., then the pitch speed of such a
      propeller would be 7x600 revolutions, or 4200 ft. per minute.
Uniform pitch.—A true pitch screw propeller is one having its blades
      formed in such a manner as to enable all of its useful portions, from the
      portion nearest the hub to its outer portion, to travel at a uniform pitch
      speed. Or, in other words, the pitch is uniform when the projected area of
      the blade is parallel along its full length and at the same time
      representing a true sector of a circle.
All screw propellers having a pitch equal to their diameters have the same
      angle for their blades at their largest diameter.
When Pitch Is Not Uniform.
A screw propeller not having a uniform pitch, but having the same angle
      for all portions of its blades, or some arbitrary angle not a true pitch,
      is distinguished from one having a true pitch in the variation of the
      pitch speeds that the various portions of its blades are forced to travel
      through while traveling at its maximum pitch speed.
On this subject Mr. R. W. Jamieson says in Aeronautics:
"Take for example an 8-foot screw propeller having an 8-foot pitch at its
      largest diameter. If the angle is the same throughout its entire blade
      length, then all the porions of its blades approaching the hub from its
      outer portion would have a gradually decreasing pitch. The 2-foot portion
      would have a 2-foot pitch; the 3-foot portion a 3-foot pitch, and so on to
      the 8-foot portion which would have an 8-foot pitch. When this form of
      propeller is caused to revolve, say 500 r.p.m., the 8-foot portion would
      have a calculated pitch speed of 8 feet by 500 revolutions, or 4,000 feet
      per min.; while the 2-foot portion would have a calculated pitch speed of
      500 revolutions by 2 feet, or 1,000 feet per minute.
Effect of Non-Uniformity.
"Now, as all of the portions of this type of screw propeller must travel
      at some pitch speed, which must have for its maximum a pitch speed in feet
      below the calculated pitch speed of the largest diameter, it follows that
      some portions of its blades would perform useful work while the action of
      the other portions would be negative—resisting the forward motion of
      the portions having a greater pitch speed. The portions having a pitch
      speed below that at which the screw is traveling cease to perform useful
      work after their pitch speed has been exceeded by the portions having a
      larger diameter and a greater pitch speed.
"We might compare the larger and smaller diameter portions of this form of
      screw propeller, to two power-driven vessels connected with a line, one
      capable of traveling 20 miles per hour, the other 10 miles per hour. It
      can be readily understood that the boat capable of traveling 10 miles per
      hour would have no useful effect to help the one traveling 20 miles per
      hour, as its action would be such as to impose a dead load upon the
      latter's progress."
The term "slip," as applied to a screw propeller, is the distance between
      its calculated pitch speed and the actual distance it travels through
      under load, depending upon the efficiency and proportion of its blades and
      the amount of load it has to carry.
The action of a screw propeller while performing useful work might be
      compared to a nut traveling on a threaded bolt; little resistance is
      offered to its forward motion while it spins freely without load, but give
      it a load to carry; then it will take more power to keep up its speed; if
      too great a load is applied the thread will strip, and so it is with a
      screw propeller gliding spirally on the air. A propeller traveling without
      load on to new air might be compared to the nut traveling freely on the
      bolt. It would consume but little power and it would travel at nearly its
      calculated pitch speed, but give it work to do and then it will take power
      to drive it.
There is a reaction caused from the propeller projecting air backward when
      it slips, which, together with the supporting effect of the blades,
      combine to produce useful work or pull on the object to be carried.
A screw propeller working under load approaches more closely to its
      maximum efficiency as it carries its load with a minimum amount of slip,
      or nearing its calculated pitch speed.
Why Blades Are Curved.
It has been pointed out by experiment that certain forms of curved
      surfaces as applied to aeroplanes will lift more per horse power, per unit
      of square foot, while on the other hand it has been shown that a flat
      surface will lift more per horse power, but requires more area of surface
      to do it.
As a true pitch screw propeller is virtually a rotating aeroplane, a
      curved surface may be advantageously employed when the limit of size
      prevents using large plane surfaces for the blades.
Care should be exercised in keeping the chord of any curve to be used for
      the blades at the proper pitch angle, and in all cases propeller blades
      should be made rigid so as to preserve the true angle and not be distorted
      by centrifugal force or from any other cause, as flexibility will
      seriously affect their pitch speed and otherwise affect their efficiency.
How to Determine Angle.
To find the angle for the proper pitch at any point in the diameter of a
      propeller, determine the circumference by multiplying the diameter by
      3.1416, which represent by drawing a line to scale in feet. At the end of
      this line draw another line to represent the desired pitch in feet. Then
      draw a line from the point representing the desired pitch in feet to the
      beginning of the circumference line. For example:
If the propeller to be laid out is 7 feet in diameter, and is to have a
      7-foot pitch, the circumference will be 21.99 feet. Draw a diagram
      representing the circumference line and pitch in feet. If this diagram is
      wrapped around a cylinder the angle line will represent a true thread 7
      feet in diameter and 7 feet long, and the angle of the thread will be 17
      3/4 degrees.
Relation of Diameter to Circumference.
Since the areas of circles decrease as the diameter lessens, it follows
      that if a propeller is to travel at a uniform pitch speed, the volume of
      its blade displacement should decrease as its diameter becomes less, so as
      to occupy a corresponding relation to the circumferences of larger
      diameters, and at the same time the projected area of the blade must be
      parallel along its full length and should represent a true sector of a
      circle.
Let us suppose a 7-foot circle to be divided into 20 sectors, one of which
      represents a propeller blade. If the pitch is to be 7 feet, then the
      greatest depth of the angle would be 1/20 part of the pitch, or 4 2/10
      inch. If the line representing the greatest depth of the angle is kept the
      same width as it approaches the hub, the pitch will be uniform. If the
      blade is set at an angle so its projected area is 1/20 part of the pitch,
      and if it is moved through 20 divisions for one revolution, it would have
      a travel of 7 feet.