CHAPTER XV. THE ELEMENT OF DANGER.
That there is an element of danger in aviation is undeniable, but it is
      nowhere so great as the public imagines. Men are killed and injured in the
      operation of flying machines just as they are killed and injured in the
      operation of railways. Considering the character of aviation the
      percentage of casualties is surprisingly small.
This is because the results following a collapse in the air are very much
      different from what might be imagined. Instead of dropping to the ground
      like a bullet an aeroplane, under ordinary conditions will, when anything
      goes wrong, sail gently downward like a parachute, particularly if the
      operator is cool-headed and nervy enough to so manipulate the apparatus as
      to preserve its equilibrium and keep the machine on an even keel.
Two Fields of Safety.
At least one prominent aviator has declared that there are two fields of
      safety—one close to the ground, and the other well up in the air. In
      the first-named the fall will be a slight one with little chance of the
      operator being seriously hurt. From the field of high altitude the the
      descent will be gradual, as a rule, the planes of the machine serving to
      break the force of the fall. With a cool-headed operator in control the
      aeroplane may be even guided at an angle (about 1 to 8) in its descent so
      as to touch the ground with a gliding motion and with a minimum of impact.
Such an experience, of course, is far from pleasant, but it is by no means
      so dangerous as might appear. There is more real danger in falling from an
      elevation of 75 or 100 feet than there is from 1,000 feet, as in the
      former case there is no chance for the machine to serve as a parachute—its
      contact with the ground comes too quickly.
Lesson in Recent Accidents.
Among the more recent fatalities in aviation are the deaths of Antonio
      Fernandez and Leon Delagrange. The former was thrown to the ground by a
      sudden stoppage of his motor, the entire machine seeming to collapse. It
      is evident there were radical defects, not only in the motor, but in the
      aeroplane framework as well. At the time of the stoppage it is estimated
      that Fernandez was up about 1,500 feet, but the machine got no opportunity
      to exert a parachute effect, as it broke up immediately. This would
      indicate a fatal weakness in the structure which, under proper testing,
      could probably have been detected before it was used in flight.
It is hard to say it, but Delagrange appears to have been culpable to
      great degree in overloading his machine with a motor equipment much
      heavier than it was designed to sustain. He was 65 feet up in the air when
      the collapse occurred, resulting in his death. As in the case of Fernandez
      common-sense precaution would doubtless have prevented the fatality.
Aviation Not Extra Hazardous.
All told there have been, up to the time of this writing (April, 1910),
      just five fatalities in the history of power-driven aviation. This is
      surprisingly low when the nature of the experiments, and the fact that
      most of the operators were far from having extended experience, is taken
      into consideration. Men like the Wrights, Curtiss, Bleriot, Farman,
      Paulhan and others, are now experts, but there was a time, and it was not
      long ago, when they were unskilled. That they, with numerous others less
      widely known, should have come safely through their many experiments would
      seem to disprove the prevailing idea that aviation is an extra hazardous
      pursuit.
In the hands of careful, quick-witted, nervy men the sailing of an airship
      should be no more hazardous than the sailing of a yacht. A vessel captain
      with common sense will not go to sea in a storm, or navigate a weak,
      unseaworthy craft. Neither should an aviator attempt to sail when the wind
      is high and gusty, nor with a machine which has not been thoroughly tested
      and found to be strong and safe.
Safer Than Railroading.
Statistics show that some 12,000 people are killed and 72,000 injured
      every year on the railroads of the United States. Come to think it over it
      is small wonder that the list of fatalities is so large. Trains are run at
      high speeds, dashing over crossings at which collisions are liable to
      occur, and over bridges which often collapse or are swept away by floods.
      Still, while the number of casualties is large, the actual percentage is
      small considering the immense number of people involved.
It is so in aviation. The number of casualties is remarkably small in
      comparison with the number of flights made. In the hands of competent men
      the sailing of an airship should be, and is, freer from risk of accident
      than the running of a railway train. There are no rails to spread or
      break, no bridges to collapse, no crossings at which collisions may occur,
      no chance for some sleepy or overworked employee to misunderstand the
      dispatcher's orders and cause a wreck.
Two Main Causes of Trouble.
The two main causes of trouble in an airship leading to disaster may be
      attributed to the stoppage of the motor, and the aviator becoming rattled
      so that he loses control of his machine. Modern ingenuity is fast
      developing motors that almost daily become more and more reliable, and
      experience is making aviators more and more self-confident in their
      ability to act wisely and promptly in cases of emergency. Besides this a
      satisfactory system of automatic control is in a fair way of being
      perfected.
Occasionally even the most experienced and competent of men in all
      callings become careless and by foolish action invite disaster. This is
      true of aviators the same as it is of railroaders, men who work in
      dynamite mills, etc. But in nearly every instance the responsibility rests
      with the individual; not with the system. There are some men unfitted by
      nature for aviation, just as there are others unfitted to be railway
      engineers.