CHAPTER XI. PLANE AND RUDDER CONTROL.
Having constructed and equipped your machine, the next thing is to decide
      upon the method of controlling the various rudders and auxiliary planes by
      which the direction and equilibrium and ascending and descending of the
      machine are governed.
The operator must be in position to shift instantaneously the position of
      rudders and planes, and also to control the action of the motor. This
      latter is supposed to work automatically and as a general thing does so
      with entire satisfaction, but there are times when the supply of gasolene
      must be regulated, and similar things done. Airship navigation calls for
      quick action, and for this reason the matter of control is an important
      one—it is more than important; it is vital.
Several Methods of Control.
Some aviators use a steering wheel somewhat after the style of that used
      in automobiles, and by this not only manipulate the rudder planes, but
      also the flow of gasolene. Others employ foot levers, and still others,
      like the Wrights, depend upon hand levers.
Curtiss steers his aeroplane by means of a wheel, but secures the desired
      stabilizing effect with an ingenious jointed chair-back. This is so
      arranged that by leaning toward the high point of his wing planes the
      aeroplane is restored to an even keel. The steering post of the wheel is
      movable backward and forward, and by this motion elevation is obtained.
The Wrights for some time used two hand levers, one to steer by and warp
      the flexible tips of the planes, the other to secure elevation. They have
      now consolidated all the functions in one lever. Bleriot also uses the
      single lever control.
Farman employs a lever to actuate the rudders, but manipulates the
      balancing planes by foot levers.
Santos-Dumont uses two hand levers with which to steer and elevate, but
      manipulates the planes by means of an attachment to the back of his outer
      coat.
Connection With the Levers.
No matter which particular method is employed, the connection between the
      levers and the object to be manipulated is almost invariably by wire. For
      instance, from the steering levers (or lever) two wires connect with
      opposite sides of the rudder. As a lever is moved so as to draw in the
      right-hand wire the rudder is drawn to the right and vice versa. The
      operation is exactly the same as in steering a boat. It is the same way in
      changing the position of the balancing planes. A movement of the hands or
      feet and the machine has changed its course, or, if the equilibrium is
      threatened, is back on an even keel.
Simple as this seems it calls for a cool head, quick eye, and steady hand.
      The least hesitation or a false movement, and both aviator and craft are
      in danger.
Which Method is Best?
It would be a bold man who would attempt to pick out any one of these
      methods of control and say it was better than the others. As in other
      sections of aeroplane mechanism each method has its advocates who dwell
      learnedly upon its advantages, but the fact remains that all the various
      plans work well and give satisfaction.
What the novice is interested in knowing is how the control is effected,
      and whether he has become proficient enough in his manipulation of it to
      be absolutely dependable in time of emergency. No amateur should attempt a
      flight alone, until he has thoroughly mastered the steering and plane
      control. If the services and advice of an experienced aviator are not to
      be had the novice should mount his machine on some suitable supports so it
      will be well clear of the ground, and, getting into the operator's seat,
      proceed to make himself well acquainted with the operation of the steering
      wheel and levers.
Some Things to Be Learned.
He will soon learn that certain movements of the steering gear produce
      certain effects on the rudders. If, for instance, his machine is equipped
      with a steering wheel, he will find that turning the wheel to the right
      turns the aeroplane in the same direction, because the tiller is brought
      around to the left. In the same way he will learn that a given movement of
      the lever throws the forward edge of the main plane upward, and that the
      machine, getting the impetus of the wind under the concave surfaces of the
      planes, will ascend. In the same way it will quickly become apparent to
      him that an opposite movement of the lever will produce an opposite effect—the
      forward edges of the planes will be lowered, the air will be "spilled" out
      to the rear, and the machine will descend.
The time expended in these preliminary lessons will be well spent. It
      would be an act of folly to attempt to actually sail the craft without
      them.