CHAPTER XVIII. DEMAND FOR FLYING MACHINES.
As a commercial proposition the manufacture and sale of motor-equipped
      aeroplanes is making much more rapid advance than at first obtained in the
      similar handling of the automobile. Great, and even phenomenal, as was the
      commercial development of the motor car, that of the flying machine is
      even greater. This is a startling statement, but it is fully warranted by
      the facts.
It is barely more than a year ago (1909) that attention was seriously
      attracted to the motor-equipped aeroplane as a vehicle possible of
      manipulation by others than professional aviators. Up to that time such
      actual flights as were made were almost exclusively with the sole purpose
      of demonstrating the practicability of the machine, and the merits of the
      ideas as to shape, engine power, etc., of the various producers.
Results of Bleriot's Daring.
It was not until Bleriot flew across the straits of Dover on July 25th,
      1909, that the general public awoke to a full realization of the fact that
      it was possible for others than professional aviators to indulge in
      aviation. Bleriot's feat was accepted as proof that at last an absolutely
      new means of sport, pleasure and research, had been practically developed,
      and was within the reach of all who had the inclination, nerve and
      financial means to adopt it.
From this event may be dated the birth of the modern flying machine into
      the world of business. The automobile was taken up by the general public
      from the very start because it was a proposition comparatively easy of
      demonstration. There was nothing mysterious or uncanny in the fact that a
      wheeled vehicle could be propelled on solid, substantial roads by means of
      engine power. And yet it took (comparatively speaking) a long time to
      really popularize the motor car.
Wonderful Results in a Year.
Men of large financial means engaged in the manufacture of automobiles,
      and expended fortunes in attracting public attention to them through the
      medium of advertisements, speed and road contests, etc. By these means a
      mammoth business has been built up, but bringing this business to its
      present proportions required years of patient industry and indomitable
      pluck.
At this writing, less than a year from the day when Bleriot crossed the
      channel, the actual sales of flying machines outnumber the actual sales of
      automobiles in the first year of their commercial development. This may
      appear incredible, but it is a fact as statistics will show.
In this connection we should take into consideration the fact that up to a
      year ago there was no serious intention of putting flying machines on the
      market; no preparations had been made to produce them on a commercial
      scale; no money had been expended in advertisements with a view to selling
      them.
Some of the Actual Results.
Today flying machines are being produced on a commercial basis, and there
      is a big demand for them. The people making them are overcrowded with
      orders. Some of the producers are already making arrangements to enlarge
      their plants and advertise their product for sale the same as is being
      done with automobiles, while a number of flying machine motor makers are
      already promoting the sale of their wares in this way.
Here are a few actual figures of flying machine sales made by the more
      prominent producers since July 25th, 1909.
Santos Dumont, 90 machines; Bleriot, 200; Farman, 130; Clemenceau-Wright,
      80; Voisin, 100; Antoinette, 100. Many of these orders have been filled by
      delivery of the machines, and in others the construction work is under
      way.
The foregoing are all of foreign make. In this country Curtiss and the
      Wrights are engaged in similar work, but no actual figures of their output
      are obtainable.
Larger Plants Are Necessary.
And this situation exists despite the fact that none of the producers are
      really equipped with adequate plants for turning out their machines on a
      modern, business-like basis. The demand was so sudden and unexpected that
      it found them poorly prepared to meet it. This, however, is now being
      remedied by the erection of special plants, the enlargement of others, and
      the introduction of new machinery and other labor-saving conveniences.
Companies, with large capitalization, to engage in the exclusive
      production of airships are being organized in many parts of the world. One
      notable instance of this nature is worth quoting as illustrative of the
      manner in which the production of flying machines is being commercialized.
      This is the formation at Frankfort, Germany, of the Flugmaschine Wright,
      G. m. b. H., with a capital of $119,000, the Krupps, of Essen, being
      interested.
Prices at Which Machines Sell.
This wonderful demand from the public has come notwithstanding the fact
      that the machines, owing to lack of facilities for wholesale production,
      are far from being cheap. Such definite quotations as are made are on the
      following basis:
Santos Dumont—List price $1,000, but owing to the rush of orders
      agents are readily getting from $1,300 to $1,500. This is the smallest
      machine made.
Bleriot—List price $2,500. This is for the cross-channel type, with
      Anzani motor.
Antoinette—List price from $4,000 to $5,000, according to size.
Wright—List price $5,600.
Curtiss—List price $5,000.
There is, however, no stability in prices as purchasers are almost
      invariably ready to pay a considerable premium to facilitate delivery.
The motor is the most expensive part of the flying machine. Motor prices
      range from $500 to $2,000, this latter amount being asked for the Curtiss
      engine.
Systematic Instruction of Amateurs.
In addition to the production of flying machines many of the experienced
      aviators are making a business of the instruction of amateurs. Curtiss and
      the Wrights in this country have a number of pupils, as have also the
      prominent foreigners. Schools of instruction are being opened in various
      parts of the world, not alone as private money-making ventures, but in
      connection with public educational institutions. One of these latter is to
      be found at the University of Barcelona, Spain.
The flying machine agent, the man who handles the machines on a
      commission, has also become a known quantity, and will soon be as numerous
      as his brother of the automobile. The sign "John Bird, agent for Skimmer's
      Flying Machine," is no longer a curiosity.
Yes, the Airship Is Here.
From all of which we may well infer that the flying machine in practical
      form has arrived, and that it is here to stay. It is no exaggeration to
      say that the time is close at hand when people will keep flying machines
      just as they now keep automobiles, and that pleasure jaunts will be fully
      as numerous and popular. With the important item of practicability fully
      demonstrated, "Come, take a trip in my airship," will have more real
      significance than now attaches to the vapid warblings of the vaudeville
      vocalist.
As a further evidence that the airship is really here, and that its
      presence is recognized in a business way, the action of life and accident
      insurance companies is interesting. Some of them are reconstructing their
      policies so as to include a special waiver of insurance by aviators.
      Anything which compels these great corporations to modify their policies
      cannot be looked upon as a mere curiosity or toy.
It is some consolation to know that the movement in this direction is not
      thus far widespread. Moreover it is more than probable that the
      competition for business will eventually induce the companies to act more
      liberally toward aviators, especially as the art of aviation advances.