CHAPTER III. MECHANICAL BIRD ACTION
In order to understand the theory of the modern flying machine one must
      also understand bird action and wind action. In this connection the
      following simple experiment will be of interest:
Take a circular-shaped bit of cardboard, like the lid of a hat box, and
      remove the bent-over portion so as to have a perfectly flat surface with a
      clean, sharp edge. Holding the cardboard at arm's length, withdraw your
      hand, leaving the cardboard without support. What is the result? The
      cardboard, being heavier than air, and having nothing to sustain it, will
      fall to the ground. Pick it up and throw it, with considerable force,
      against the wind edgewise. What happens? Instead of falling to the ground,
      the cardboard sails along on the wind, remaining afloat so long as it is
      in motion. It seeks the ground, by gravity, only as the motion ceases, and
      then by easy stages, instead of dropping abruptly as in the first
      instance.
Here we have a homely, but accurate illustration of the action of the
      flying machine. The motor does for the latter what the force of your arm
      does for the cardboard—imparts a motion which keeps it afloat. The
      only real difference is that the motion given by the motor is continuous
      and much more powerful than that given by your arm. The action of the
      latter is limited and the end of its propulsive force is reached within a
      second or two after it is exerted, while the action of the motor is
      prolonged.
Another Simple Illustration.
Another simple means of illustrating the principle of flying machine
      operation, so far as sustentation and the elevation and depression of the
      planes is concerned, is explained in the accompanying diagram.
A is a piece of cardboard about 2 by 3 inches in size. B is a piece of
      paper of the same size pasted to one edge of A. If you bend the paper to a
      curve, with convex side up and blow across it as shown in Figure C, the
      paper will rise instead of being depressed. The dotted lines show that the
      air is passing over the top of the curved paper and yet, no matter how
      hard you may blow, the effect will be to elevate the paper, despite the
      fact that the air is passing over, instead of under the curved surface.
In Figure D we have an opposite effect. Here the paper is in a curve
      exactly the reverse of that shown in Figure C, bringing the concave side
      up. Now if you will again blow across the surface of the card the action
      of the paper will be downward—it will be impossible to make it rise.
      The harder you blow the greater will be the downward movement.
Principle In General Use.
This principle is taken advantage of in the construction of all successful
      flying machines. Makers of monoplanes and biplanes alike adhere to curved
      bodies, with the concave surface facing downward. Straight planes were
      tried for a time, but found greatly lacking in the power of sustentation.
      By curving the planes, and placing the concave surface downward, a sort of
      inverted bowl is formed in which the air gathers and exerts a buoyant
      effect. Just what the ratio of the curve should be is a matter of
      contention. In some instances one inch to the foot is found to be
      satisfactory; in others this is doubled, and there are a few cases in
      which a curve of as much as 3 inches to the foot has been used.
Right here it might be well to explain that the word "plane" applied to
      flying machines of modern construction is in reality a misnomer. Plane
      indicates a flat, level surface. As most successful flying machines have
      curved supporting surfaces it is clearly wrong to speak of "planes," or
      "aeroplanes." Usage, however, has made the terms convenient and, as they
      are generally accepted and understood by the public, they are used in like
      manner in this volume.
Getting Under Headway.
A bird, on first rising from the ground, or beginning its flight from a
      tree, will flap its wings to get under headway. Here again we have another
      illustration of the manner in which a flying machine gets under headway—the
      motor imparts the force necessary to put the machine into the air, but
      right here the similarity ceases. If the machine is to be kept afloat the
      motor must be kept moving. A flying machine will not sustain itself; it
      will not remain suspended in the air unless it is under headway. This is
      because it is heavier than air, and gravity draws it to the ground.
Puzzle in Bird Soaring.
But a bird, which is also heavier than air, will remain suspended, in a
      calm, will even soar and move in a circle, without apparent movement of
      its wings. This is explained on the theory that there are generally
      vertical columns of air in circulation strong enough to sustain a bird,
      but much too weak to exert any lifting power on a flying machine, It is
      easy to understand how a bird can remain suspended when the wind is in
      action, but its suspension in a seeming dead calm was a puzzle to
      scientists until Mr. Chanute advanced the proposition of vertical columns
      of air.
Modeled Closely After Birds.
So far as possible, builders of flying machines have taken what may be
      called "the architecture" of birds as a model. This is readily noticeable
      in the form of construction. When a bird is in motion its wings (except
      when flapping) are extended in a straight line at right angles to its
      body. This brings a sharp, thin edge against the air, offering the least
      possible surface for resistance, while at the same time a broad surface
      for support is afforded by the flat, under side of the wings. Identically
      the same thing is done in the construction of the flying machine.
Note, for instance, the marked similarity in form as shown in the
      illustration in Chapter II. Here A is the bird, and B the general outline
      of the machine. The thin edge of the plane in the latter is almost a
      duplicate of that formed by the outstretched wings of the bird, while the
      rudder plane in the rear serves the same purpose as the bird's tail.