CHAPTER XIV. ABOUT WIND CURRENTS, ETC.
One of the first difficulties which the novice will encounter is the
      uncertainty of the wind currents. With a low velocity the wind, some
      distance away from the ground, is ordinarily steady. As the velocity
      increases, however, the wind generally becomes gusty and fitful in its
      action. This, it should be remembered, does not refer to the velocity of
      the machine, but to that of the air itself.
In this connection Mr. Arthur T. Atherholt, president of the Aero Club of
      Pennsylvania, in addressing the Boston Society of Scientific Research,
      said:
"Probably the whirlpools of Niagara contain no more erratic currents than
      the strata of air which is now immediately above us, a fact hard to
      realize on account of its invisibility."
Changes In Wind Currents.
While Mr. Atherholt's experience has been mainly with balloons it is all
      the more valuable on this account, as the balloons were at the mercy of
      the wind and their varying directions afforded an indisputable guide as to
      the changing course of the air currents. In speaking of this he said:
"In the many trips taken, varying in distance traversed from twenty-five
      to 900 miles, it was never possible except in one instance to maintain a
      straight course. These uncertain currents were most noticeable in the
      Gordon-Bennett race from St. Louis in 1907. Of the nine aerostats
      competing in that event, eight covered a more or less direct course due
      east and southeast, whereas the writer, with Major Henry B. Hersey, first
      started northwest, then north, northeast, east, east by south, and when
      over the center of Lake Erie were again blown northwest notwithstanding
      that more favorable winds were sought for at altitudes varying from 100 to
      3,000 meters, necessitating a finish in Canada nearly northeast of the
      starting point.
"These nine balloons, making landings extending from Lake Ontario, Canada,
      to Virginia, all started from one point within the same hour.
"The single exception to these roving currents occurred on October 21st,
      of last year (1909) when, starting from Philadelphia, the wind shifted
      more than eight degrees, the greatest variation being at the lowest
      altitudes, yet at no time was a height of over a mile reached.
"Throughout the entire day the sky was overcast, with a thermometer
      varying from fifty-seven degrees at 300 feet to forty-four degrees,
      Fahrenheit at 5,000 feet, at which altitude the wind had a velocity of 43
      miles an hour, in clouds of a cirro-cumulus nature, a landing finally
      being made near Tannersville, New York, in the Catskill mountains, after a
      voyage of five and one-half hours.
"I have no knowledge of a recorded trip of this distance and duration,
      maintained in practically a straight line from start to finish."
This wind disturbance is more noticeable and more difficult to contend
      with in a balloon than in a flying machine, owing to the bulk and unwieldy
      character of the former. At the same time it is not conducive to pleasant,
      safe or satisfactory sky-sailing in an aeroplane. This is not stated with
      the purpose of discouraging aviation, but merely that the operator may
      know what to expect and be prepared to meet it.
Not only does the wind change its horizontal course abruptly and without
      notice, but it also shifts in a vertical direction, one second blowing up,
      and another down. No man has as yet fathomed the why and wherefore of this
      erratic action; it is only known that it exists.
The most stable currents will be found from 50 to 100 feet from the earth,
      provided the wind is not diverted by such objects as trees, rocks, etc.
      That there are equally stable currents higher up is true, but they are
      generally to be found at excessive altitudes.
How a Bird Meets Currents.
Observe a bird in action on a windy day and you will find it continually
      changing the position of its wings. This is done to meet the varying gusts
      and eddies of the air so that sustentation may be maintained and headway
      made. One second the bird is bending its wings, altering the angle of
      incidence; the next it is lifting or depressing one wing at a time. Still
      again it will extend one wing tip in advance of the other, or be spreading
      or folding, lowering or raising its tail.
All these motions have a meaning, a purpose. They assist the bird in
      preserving its equilibrium. Without them the bird would be just as
      helpless in the air as a human being and could not remain afloat.
When the wind is still, or comparatively so, a bird, having secured the
      desired altitude by flight at an angle, may sail or soar with no wing
      action beyond an occasional stroke when it desires to advance. But, in a
      gusty, uncertain wind it must use its wings or alight somewhere.
Trying to Imitate the Bird.
Writing in Fly, Mr. William E. White says:
Fly
"The bird's flight suggests a number of ways in which the equilibrium of a
      mechanical bird may be controlled. Each of these methods of control may be
      effected by several different forms of mechanism.
"Placing the two wings of an aeroplane at an angle of three to five
      degrees to each other is perhaps the oldest way of securing lateral
      balance. This way readily occurs to anyone who watches a sea gull soaring.
      The theory of the dihedral angle is that when one wing is lifted by a gust
      of wind, the air is spilled from under it; while the other wing, being
      correspondingly depressed, presents a greater resistance to the gust and
      is lifted restoring the balance. A fixed angle of three to five degrees,
      however, will only be sufficient for very light puffs of wind and to mount
      the wings so that the whole wing may be moved to change the dihedral angle
      presents mechanical difficulties which would be better avoided.
"The objection of mechanical impracticability applies to any plan to
      preserve the balance by shifting weight or ballast. The center of gravity
      should be lower than the center of the supporting surfaces, but cannot be
      made much lower. It is a common mistake to assume that complete stability
      will be secured by hanging the center of gravity very low on the principle
      of the parachute. An aeroplane depends upon rapid horizontal motion for
      its support, and if the center of gravity be far below the center of
      support, every change of speed or wind pressure will cause the machine to
      turn about its center of gravity, pitching forward and backward
      dangerously.
Preserving Longitudinal Balance.
"The birds maintain longitudinal, or fore and aft balance, by elevating or
      depressing their tails. Whether this action is secured in an aeroplane by
      means of a horizontal rudder placed in the rear, or by deflecting planes
      placed in front of the main planes, the principle is evidently the same. A
      horizontal rudder placed well to the rear as in the Antoinette, Bleriot or
      Santos-Dumont monoplanes, will be very much safer and steadier than the
      deflecting planes in front, as in the Wright or Curtiss biplanes, but not
      so sensitive or prompt in action.
"The natural fore and aft stability is very much strengthened by placing
      the load well forward. The center of gravity near the front and a tail or
      rudder streaming to the rear secures stability as an arrow is balanced by
      the head and feathering. The adoption of this principle makes it almost
      impossible for the aeroplane to turn over.
The Matter of Lateral Balance.
"All successful aeroplanes thus far have maintained lateral balance by the
      principle of changing the angle of incidence of the wings.
"Other ways of maintaining the lateral balance, suggested by observation
      of the flight of birds are—extending the wing tips and spilling the
      air through the pinions; or, what is the same thing, varying the area of
      the wings at their extremities.
"Extending the wing tips seems to be a simple and effective solution of
      the problem. The tips may be made to swing outward upon a vertical axis
      placed at the front edge of the main planes; or they may be hinged to the
      ends of the main plane so as to be elevated or depressed through suitable
      connections by the aviator; or they may be supported from a horizontal
      axis parallel with the ends of the main planes so that they may swing
      outward, the aviator controlling both tips through one lever so that as
      one tip is extended the other is retracted.
"The elastic wing pinions of a bird bend easily before the wind,
      permitting the gusts to glance off, but presenting always an even and
      efficient curvature to the steady currents of the air."
High Winds Threaten Stability.
To ensure perfect stability, without control, either human or automatic,
      it is asserted that the aeroplane must move faster than the wind is
      blowing. So long as the wind is blowing at the rate of 30 miles an hour,
      and the machine is traveling 40 or more, there will be little trouble as
      regards equilibrium so far as wind disturbance goes, provided the wind
      blows evenly and does not come in gusts or eddying currents. But when
      conditions are reversed—when the machine travels only 30 miles an
      hour and the wind blows at the rate of 50, look out for loss of
      equilibrium.
One of the main reasons for this is that high winds are rarely steady;
      they seldom blow for any length of time at the same speed. They are
      usually "gusty," the gusts being a momentary movement at a higher speed.
      Tornadic gusts are also formed by the meeting of two opposing currents,
      causing a whirling motion, which makes stability uncertain. Besides, it is
      not unusual for wind of high speed to suddenly change its direction
      without warning.
Trouble With Vertical Columns.
Vertical currents—columns of ascending air—are frequently
      encountered in unexpected places and have more or less tendency, according
      to their strength, to make it difficult to keep the machine within a
      reasonable distance from the ground.
These vertical currents are most generally noticeable in the vicinity of
      steep cliffs, or deep ravines. In such instances they are usually of
      considerable strength, being caused by the deflection of strong winds
      blowing against the face of the cliffs. This deflection exerts a back
      pressure which is felt quite a distance away from the point of origin, so
      that the vertical current exerts an influence in forcing the machine
      upward long before the cliff is reached.