CHAPTER XXII. PROBLEMS OF AERIAL FLIGHT.
In a lecture before the Royal Society of Arts, reported in Engineering, F.
      W. Lanchester took the position that practical flight was not the abstract
      question which some apparently considered it to be, but a problem in
      locomotive engineering. The flying machine was a locomotive appliance,
      designed not merely to lift a weight, but to transport it elsewhere, a
      fact which should be sufficiently obvious. Nevertheless one of the leading
      scientific men of the day advocated a type in which this, the main
      function of the flying machine, was overlooked. When the machine was
      considered as a method of transport, the vertical screw type, or
      helicopter, became at once ridiculous. It had, nevertheless, many
      advocates who had some vague and ill-defined notion of subsequent motion
      through the air after the weight was raised.
Helicopter Type Useless.
When efficiency of transport was demanded, the helicopter type was
      entirely out of court. Almost all of its advocates neglected the effect of
      the motion of the machine through the air on the efficiency of the
      vertical screws. They either assumed that the motion was so slow as not to
      matter, or that a patch of still air accompanied the machine in its
      flight. Only one form of this type had any possibility of success. In this
      there were two screws running on inclined axles—one on each side of
      the weight to be lifted. The action of such inclined screw was curious,
      and in a previous lecture he had pointed out that it was almost exactly
      the same as that of a bird's wing. In high-speed racing craft such
      inclined screws were of necessity often used, but it was at a sacrifice of
      their efficiency. In any case the efficiency of the inclined-screw
      helicopter could not compare with that of an aeroplane, and that type
      might be dismissed from consideration so soon as efficiency became the
      ruling factor of the design.
Must Compete With Locomotive.
To justify itself the aeroplane must compete, in some regard or other,
      with other locomotive appliances, performing one or more of the purposes
      of locomotion more efficiently than existing systems. It would be no use
      unless able to stem air currents, so that its velocity must be greater
      than that of the worst winds liable to be encountered. To illustrate the
      limitations imposed on the motion of an aeroplane by wind velocity, Mr.
      Lanchester gave the diagrams shown in Figs. 1 to 4. The circle in each
      case was, he said, described with a radius equal to the speed of the
      aeroplane in still air, from a center placed "down-wind" from the
      aeroplane by an amount equal to the velocity of the wind.
Fig. 1 therefore represented the case in which the air was still, and in
      this case the aeroplane represented by A had perfect liberty of
      movement in any direction
A
In Fig. 2 the velocity of the wind was half that of the aeroplane, and the
      latter could still navigate in any direction, but its speed against the
      wind was only one-third of its speed with the wind.
In Fig. 3 the velocity of the wind was equal to that of the aeroplane, and
      then motion against the wind was impossible; but it could move to any
      point of the circle, but not to any point lying to the left of the tangent
      A B. Finally, when the wind had a greater speed than the
      aeroplane, as in Fig. 4, the machine could move only in directions limited
      by the tangents A C and A D.
A
B
A
C
A
D
Matter of Fuel Consumption.
Taking the case in which the wind had a speed equal to half that of the
      aeroplane, Mr. Lanchester said that for a given journey out and home, down
      wind and back, the aeroplane would require 30 per cent more fuel than if
      the trip were made in still air; while if the journey was made at right
      angles to the direction of the wind the fuel needed would be 15 per cent
      more than in a calm. This 30 per cent extra was quite a heavy enough
      addition to the fuel; and to secure even this figure it was necessary that
      the aeroplane should have a speed of twice that of the maximum wind in
      which it was desired to operate the machine. Again, as stated in the last
      lecture, to insure the automatic stability of the machine it was necessary
      that the aeroplane speed should be largely in excess of that of the gusts
      of wind liable to be encountered.
Eccentricities of the Wind.
There was, Mr. Lanchester said, a loose connection between the average
      velocity of the wind and the maximum speed of the gusts. When the average
      speed of the wind was 40 miles per hour, that of the gusts might be equal
      or more. At one moment there might be a calm or the direction of the wind
      even reversed, followed, the next moment, by a violent gust. About the
      same minimum speed was desirable for security against gusts as was
      demanded by other considerations. Sixty miles an hour was the least figure
      desirable in an aeroplane, and this should be exceeded as much as
      possible. Actually, the Wright machine had a speed of 38 miles per hour,
      while Farman's Voisin machine flew at 45 miles per hour.
Both machines were extremely sensitive to high winds, and the speaker, in
      spite of newspaper reports to the contrary, had never seen either flown in
      more than a gentle breeze. The damping out of the oscillations of the
      flight path, discussed in the last lecture, increased with the fourth
      power of the natural velocity of flight, and rapid damping formed the
      easiest, and sometimes the only, defense against dangerous oscillations. A
      machine just stable at 35 miles per hour would have reasonably rapid
      damping if its speed were increased to 60 miles per hour.
Thinks Use Is Limited.
It was, the lecturer proceeded, inconceivable that any very extended use
      should be made of the aeroplane unless the speed was much greater than
      that of the motor car. It might in special cases be of service, apart from
      this increase of speed, as in the exploration of countries destitute of
      roads, but it would have no general utility. With an automobile averaging
      25 to 35 miles per hour, almost any part of Europe, Russia excepted, was
      attainable in a day's journey. A flying machine of but equal speed would
      have no advantages, but if the speed could be raised to 90 or 100 miles
      per hour, the whole continent of Europe would become a playground, every
      part being within a daylight flight of Berlin. Further, some marine craft
      now had speeds of 40 miles per hour, and efficiently to follow up and
      report movements of such vessels an aeroplane should travel at 60 miles
      per hour at least. Hence from all points of view appeared the imperative
      desirability of very high velocities of flight. The difficulties of
      achievement were, however, great.
Weight of Lightest Motors.
As shown in the first lecture of his course, the resistance to motion was
      nearly independent of the velocity, so that the total work done in
      transporting a given weight was nearly constant. Hence the question of
      fuel economy was not a bar to high velocities of flight, though should
      these become excessive, the body resistance might constitute a large
      proportion of the total. The horsepower required varied as the velocity,
      so the factor governing the maximum velocity of flight was the horsepower
      that could be developed on a given weight. At present the weight per
      horsepower of feather-weight motors appeared to range from 2 1/4 pounds up
      to 7 pounds per brake horsepower, some actual figures being as follows:
Antoinette........ 5 lbs.
         Fiat.............. 3 lbs.
         Gnome....... Under 3 lbs.
         Metallurgic....... 8 lbs.
         Renault........... 7 lbs.
         Wright.............6 lbs.
Automobile engines, on the other hand, commonly weighed 12 pounds to 13
      pounds per brake horsepower.
For short flights fuel economy was of less importance than a saving in the
      weight of the engine. For long flights, however, the case was different.
      Thus, if the gasolene consumption was 1/2 pound per horsepower hour, and
      the engine weighed 3 pounds per brake horsepower, the fuel needed for a
      six-hour flight would weigh as much as the engine, but for half an hour's
      flight its weight would be unimportant.
Best Means of Propulsion.
The best method of propulsion was by the screw, which acting in air was
      subject to much the same conditions as obtained in marine work. Its
      efficiency depended on its diameter and pitch and on its position, whether
      in front of or behind the body propelled. From this theory of dynamic
      support, Mr. Lanchester proceeded, the efficiency of each element of a
      screw propeller could be represented by curves such as were given in his
      first lecture before the society, and from these curves the over-all
      efficiency of any proposed propeller could be computed, by mere
      inspection, with a fair degree of accuracy. These curves showed that the
      tips of long-bladed propellers were inefficient, as was also the portion
      of the blade near the root. In actual marine practice the blade from boss
      to tip was commonly of such a length that the over-all efficiency was 95
      per cent of that of the most efficient element of it.
Advocates Propellers in Rear.
From these curves the diameter and appropriate pitch of a screw could be
      calculated, and the number of revolutions was then fixed. Thus, for a
      speed of 80 feet per second the pitch might come out as 8 feet, in which
      case the revolutions would be 600 per minute, which might, however, be too
      low for the motor. It was then necessary either to gear down the
      propeller, as was done in the Wright machine, or, if it was decided to
      drive it direct, to sacrifice some of the efficiency of the propeller. An
      analogous case arose in the application of the steam turbine to the
      propulsion of cargo boats, a problem as yet unsolved. The propeller should
      always be aft, so that it could abstract energy from the wake current, and
      also so that its wash was clear of the body propelled. The best possible
      efficiency was about 70 per cent, and it was safe to rely upon 66 per
      cent.
Benefits of Soaring Flight.
There was, Mr. Lanchester proceeded, some possibility of the aeronaut
      reducing the power needed for transport by his adopting the principle of
      soaring flight, as exemplified by some birds. There were, he continued,
      two different modes of soaring flight. In the one the bird made use of the
      upward current of air often to be found in the neighborhood of steep
      vertical cliffs. These cliffs deflected the air upward long before it
      actually reached the cliff, a whole region below being thus the seat of an
      upward current. Darwin has noted that the condor was only to be found in
      the neighborhood of such cliffs. Along the south coast also the gulls made
      frequent use of the up currents due to the nearly perpendicular chalk
      cliffs along the shore.
In the tropics up currents were also caused by temperature differences.
      Cumulus clouds, moreover, were nearly always the terminations of such up
      currents of heated air, which, on cooling by expansion in the upper
      regions, deposited their moisture as fog. These clouds might, perhaps,
      prove useful in the future in showing the aeronaut where up currents were
      to be found. Another mode of soaring flight was that adopted by the
      albatross, which took advantage of the fact that the air moved in
      pulsations, into which the bird fitted itself, being thus able to extract
      energy from the wind. Whether it would be possible for the aeronaut to
      employ a similar method must be left to the future to decide.
Main Difficulties in Aviation.
In practical flight difficulties arose in starting and in alighting. There
      was a lower limit to the speed at which the machine was stable, and it was
      inadvisable to leave the ground till this limit was attained. Similarly,
      in alighting it was inexpedient to reduce the speed below the limit of
      stability. This fact constituted a difficulty in the adoption of high
      speeds, since the length of run needed increased in proportion to the
      square of the velocity. This drawback could, however, be surmounted by
      forming starting and alighting grounds of ample size. He thought it quite
      likely in the future that such grounds would be considered as essential to
      the flying machine as a seaport was to an ocean-going steamer or as a road
      was to the automobile.
Requisites of Flying Machine.
Flying machines were commonly divided into monoplanes and biplanes,
      according as they had one or two supporting surfaces. The distinction was
      not, however, fundamental. To get the requisite strength some form of
      girder framework was necessary, and it was a mere question of convenience
      whether the supporting surface was arranged along both the top and the
      bottom of this girder, or along the bottom only. The framework adopted
      universally was of wood braced by ties of pianoforte wire, an arrangement
      giving the stiffness desired with the least possible weight. Some kind of
      chassis was also necessary.