CHAPTER VIII. THE REAL FLYING MACHINE.
We will now assume that you have become proficient enough to warrant an
      attempt at the construction of a real flying machine—one that will
      not only remain suspended in the air at the will of the operator, but make
      respectable progress in whatever direction he may desire to go. The
      glider, it must be remembered, is not steerable, except to a limited
      extent, and moves only in one direction—against the wind. Besides
      this its power of flotation—suspension in the air—is
      circumscribed.
Larger Surface Area Required.
The real flying machine is the glider enlarged, and equipped with motor
      and propeller. The first thing to do is to decide upon the size required.
      While a glider of 20 foot spread is large enough to sustain a man it could
      not under any possible conditions, be made to rise with the weight of the
      motor, propeller and similar equipment added. As the load is increased so
      must the surface area of the planes be increased. Just what this increase
      in surface area should be is problematical as experienced aviators
      disagree, but as a general proposition it may be placed at from three to
      four times the area of a 20-foot glider. 3
3
3
Some Practical Examples.
The Wrights used a biplane 41 feet in spread, and 6 1/2 ft. deep. This,
      for the two planes, gives a total surface area of 538 square feet,
      inclusive of auxiliary planes. This sustains the engine equipment,
      operator, etc., a total weight officially announced at 1,070 pounds. It
      shows a lifting capacity of about two pounds to the square foot of plane
      surface, as against a lifting capacity of about 1/2 pound per square foot
      of plane surface for the 20-foot glider. This same Wright machine is also
      reported to have made a successful flight, carrying a total load of 1,100
      pounds, which would be over two pounds for each square foot of surface
      area, which, with auxiliary planes, is 538 square feet.
To attain the same results in a monoplane, the single surface would have
      to be 60 feet in spread and 9 feet deep. But, while this is the
      mathematical rule, Bleriot has demonstrated that it does not always hold
      good. On his record-breaking trip across the English channel, July 25th,
      1909, the Frenchman was carried in a monoplane 24 1/2 feet in spread, and
      with a total sustaining surface of 150 1/2 square feet. The total weight
      of the outfit, including machine, operator and fuel sufficient for a
      three-hour run, was only 660 pounds. With an engine of (nominally) 25
      horsepower the distance of 21 miles was covered in 37 minutes.
Which is the Best?
Right here an established mathematical quantity is involved. A small plane
      surface offers less resistance to the air than a large one and
      consequently can attain a higher rate of speed. As explained further on in
      this chapter speed is an important factor in the matter of
      weight-sustaining capacity. A machine that travels one-third faster than
      another can get along with one-half the surface area of the latter without
      affecting the load. See the closing paragraph of this chapter on this
      point. In theory the construction is also the simplest, but this is not
      always found to be so in practice. The designing and carrying into
      execution of plans for an extensive area like that of a monoplane involves
      great skill and cleverness in getting a framework that will be strong
      enough to furnish the requisite support without an undue excess of weight.
      This proposition is greatly simplified in the biplane and, while the speed
      attained by the latter may not be quite so great as that of the monoplane,
      it has much larger weight-carrying capacity.
Proper Sizes For Frame.
Allowing that the biplane form is selected the construction may be
      practically identical with that of the 20-foot glider described in Chapter
      V., except as to size and elimination of the armpieces. In size the
      surface planes should be about twice as large as those of the 20-foot
      glider, viz: 40 feet spread instead of 20, and 6 feet deep instead of 3.
      The horizontal beams, struts, stanchions, ribs, etc., should also be
      increased in size proportionately.
While care in the selection of clear, straight-grained timber is important
      in the glider, it is still more important in the construction of a
      motor-equipped flying machine as the strain on the various parts will be
      much greater.
How to Splice Timbers.
It is practically certain that you will have to resort to splicing the
      horizontal beams as it will be difficult, if not impossible, to find
      40-foot pieces of timber totally free from knots and worm holes, and of
      straight grain.
If splicing is necessary select two good 20-foot pieces, 3 inches wide and
      1 1/2 inches thick, and one 10-foot long, of the same thickness and width.
      Plane off the bottom sides of the 10-foot strip, beginning about two feet
      back from each end, and taper them so the strip will be about 3/4 inch
      thick at the extreme ends. Lay the two 20-foot beams end to end, and under
      the joint thus made place the 10-foot strip, with the planed-off ends
      downward. The joint of the 20-foot pieces should be directly in the center
      of the 10-foot piece. Bore ten holes (with a 1/4-inch augur) equi-distant
      apart through the 20-foot strips and the 10-foot strip under them. Through
      these holes run 1/4-inch stove bolts with round, beveled heads. In placing
      these bolts use washers top and bottom, one between the head and the top
      beam, and the other between the bottom beam and the screw nut which holds
      the bolt. Screw the nuts down hard so as to bring the two beams tightly
      together, and you will have a rigid 40-foot beam.
Splicing with Metal Sleeves.
An even better way of making a splice is by tonguing and grooving the ends
      of the frame pieces and enclosing them in a metal sleeve, but it requires
      more mechanical skill than the method first named. The operation of
      tonguing and grooving is especially delicate and calls for extreme nicety
      of touch in the handling of tools, but if this dexterity is possessed the
      job will be much more satisfactory than one done with a third timber.
As the frame pieces are generally about 1 1/2 inch in diameter, the tongue
      and the groove into which the tongue fits must be correspondingly small.
      Begin by sawing into one side of one of the frame pieces about 4 inches
      back from the end. Make the cut about 1/2 inch deep. Then turn the piece
      over and duplicate the cut. Next saw down from the end to these cuts. When
      the sawed-out parts are removed you will have a "tongue" in the end of the
      frame timber 4 inches long and 1/2 inch thick. The next move is to saw out
      a 5/8-inch groove in the end of the frame piece which is to be joined. You
      will have to use a small chisel to remove the 5/8-inch bit. This will
      leave a groove into which the tongue will fit easily.
Joining the Two Pieces.
Take a thin metal sleeve—this is merely a hollow tube of aluminum or
      brass open at each end—8 inches long, and slip it over either the
      tongued or grooved end of one of the frame timbers. It is well to have the
      sleeve fit snugly, and this may necessitate a sand-papering of the frame
      pieces so the sleeve will slip on.
Push the sleeve well back out of the way. Cover the tongue thoroughly with
      glue, and also put some on the inside of the groove. Use plenty of glue.
      Now press the tongue into the groove, and keep the ends firmly together
      until the glue is thoroughly dried. Rub off the joint lightly with
      sand-paper to remove any of the glue which may have oozed out, and slip
      the sleeve into place over the joint. Tack the sleeve in position with
      small copper tacks, and you will have an ideal splice.
The same operation is to be repeated on each of the four frame pieces. Two
      20-foot pieces joined in this way will give a substantial frame, but when
      suitable timber of this kind can not be had, three pieces, each 6 feet 11
      inches long, may be used. This would give 20 feet 9 inches, of which 8
      inches will be taken up in the two joints, leaving the frame 20 feet 1
      inch long.
Installation of Motor.
Next comes the installation of the motor. The kinds and efficiency of the
      various types are described in the following chapter (IX). All we are
      interested in at this point is the manner of installation. This varies
      according to the personal ideas of the aviator. Thus one man puts his
      motor in the front of his machine, another places it in the center, and
      still another finds the rear of the frame the best. All get good results,
      the comparative advantages of which it is difficult to estimate. Where one
      man, as already explained, flies faster than another, the one beaten from
      the speed standpoint has an advantage in the matter of carrying weight,
      etc.
The ideas of various well-known aviators as to the correct placing of
      motors may be had from the following:
Wrights—In rear of machine and to one side.
Curtiss—Well to rear, about midway between upper and lower planes.
Raich—In rear, above the center.
Brauner-Smith—In exact center of machine.
Van Anden—In center.
Herring-Burgess—Directly behind operator.
Voisin—In rear, and on lower plane.
Bleriot—In front.
R. E. P.—In front.
The One Chief Object.
An even distribution of the load so as to assist in maintaining the
      equilibrium of the machine, should be the one chief object in deciding
      upon the location of the motor. It matters little what particular spot is
      selected so long as the weight does not tend to overbalance the machine,
      or to "throw it off an even keel." It is just like loading a vessel, an
      operation in which the expert seeks to so distribute the weight of the
      cargo as to keep the vessel in a perfectly upright position, and prevent a
      "list" or leaning to one side. The more evenly the cargo is distributed
      the more perfect will be the equilibrium of the vessel and the better it
      can be handled. Sometimes, when not properly stowed, the cargo shifts, and
      this at once affects the position of the craft. When a ship "lists" to
      starboard or port a preponderating weight of the cargo has shifted
      sideways; if bow or stern is unduly depressed it is a sure indication that
      the cargo has shifted accordingly. In either event the handling of the
      craft becomes not only difficult, but extremely hazardous. Exactly the
      same conditions prevail in the handling of a flying machine.
Shape of Machine a Factor.
In placing the motor you must be governed largely by the shape and
      construction of the flying machine frame. If the bulk of the weight of the
      machine and auxiliaries is toward the rear, then the natural location for
      the motor will be well to the front so as to counterbalance the excess in
      rear weight. In the same way if the preponderance of the weight is
      forward, then the motor should be placed back of the center.
As the propeller blade is really an integral part of the motor, the latter
      being useless without it, its placing naturally depends upon the location
      selected for the motor.
Rudders and Auxiliary Planes.
Here again there is great diversity of opinion among aviators as to size,
      location and form. The striking difference of ideas in this respect is
      well illustrated in the choice made by prominent makers as follows:
Voisin—horizontal rudder, with two wing-like planes, in front;
      box-like longitudinal stability plane in rear, inside of which is a
      vertical rudder.
Wright—large biplane horizontal rudder in front at considerable
      distance—about 10 feet—from the main planes; vertical biplane
      rudder in rear; ends of upper and lower main planes made flexible so they
      may be moved.
Curtiss—horizontal biplane rudder, with vertical damping plane
      between the rudder planes about 10 feet in front of main planes; vertical
      rudder in rear; stabilizing planes at each end of upper main plane.
Bleriot—V-shaped stabilizing fin, projecting from rear of plane,
      with broad end outward; to the broad end of this fin is hinged a vertical
      rudder; horizontal biplane rudder, also in rear, under the fin.
These instances show forcefully the wide diversity of opinion existing
      among experienced aviators as to the best manner of placing the rudders
      and stabilizing, or auxiliary planes, and make manifest how hopeless would
      be the task of attempting to select any one form and advise its exclusive
      use.
Rudder and Auxiliary Construction.
The material used in the construction of the rudders and auxiliary planes
      is the same as that used in the main planes—spruce for the framework
      and some kind of rubberized or varnished cloth for the covering. The
      frames are joined and wired in exactly the same manner as the frames of
      the main planes, the purpose being to secure the same strength and
      rigidity. Dimensions of the various parts depend upon the plan adopted and
      the size of the main plane.
No details as to exact dimensions of these rudders and auxiliary planes
      are obtainable. The various builders, while willing enough to supply data
      as to the general measurements, weight, power, etc., of their machines,
      appear to have overlooked the details of the auxiliary parts, thinking,
      perhaps, that these were of no particular import to the general public. In
      the Wright machine, the rear horizontal and front vertical rudders may be
      set down as being about one-quarter (probably a little less) the size of
      the main supporting planes.
Arrangement of Alighting Gear.
Most modern machines are equipped with an alighting gear, which not only
      serves to protect the machine and aviator from shock or injury in touching
      the ground, but also aids in getting under headway. All the leading makes,
      with the exception of the Wright, are furnished with a frame carrying from
      two to five pneumatic rubber-tired bicycle wheels. In the Curtiss and
      Voisin machines one wheel is placed in front and two in the rear. In the
      Bleriot and other prominent machines the reverse is the rule—two
      wheels in front and one in the rear. Farman makes use of five wheels, one
      in the extreme rear, and four, arranged in pairs, a little to the front of
      the center of the main lower plane.
In place of wheels the Wright machine is equipped with a skid-like device
      consisting of two long beams attached to the lower plane by stanchions and
      curving up far in front, so as to act as supports to the horizontal
      rudder.
Why Wood Is Favored.
A frequently asked question is: "Why is not aluminum, or some similar
      metal, substituted for wood." Wood, particularly spruce, is preferred
      because, weight considered, it is much stronger than aluminum, and this is
      the lightest of all metals. In this connection the following table will be
      of interest:
Compressive
                   Weight      Tensile Strength         Strength
               per cubic foot    per sq. inch         per sq. inch
  Material        in lbs.           in lbs.              in lbs.
  Spruce....    25               8,000                5,000
  Aluminum         162              16,000              ......
  Brass (sheet)    510              23,000               12,000
  Steel (tool)     490             100,000               40,000
  Copper (sheet)   548              30,000               40,000
As extreme lightness, combined with strength, especially tensile strength,
      is the great essential in flying-machine construction, it can be readily
      seen that the use of metal, even aluminum, for the framework, is
      prohibited by its weight. While aluminum has double the strength of spruce
      wood it is vastly heavier, and thus the advantage it has in strength is
      overbalanced many times by its weight. The specific gravity of aluminum is
      2.50; that of spruce is only 0.403.
Things to Be Considered.
In laying out plans for a flying machine there are five important points
      which should be settled upon before the actual work of construction is
      started. These are:
First—Approximate weight of the machine when finished and equipped.
Second—Area of the supporting surface required.
Third—Amount of power that will be necessary to secure the desired
      speed and lifting capacity.
Fourth—Exact dimensions of the main framework and of the auxiliary
      parts.
Fifth—Size, speed and character of the propeller.
In deciding upon these it will be well to take into consideration the
      experience of expert aviators regarding these features as given elsewhere.
      (See Chapter X.)
Estimating the Weights Involved.
In fixing upon the probable approximate weight in advance of construction
      much, of course, must be assumed. This means that it will be a matter of
      advance estimating. If a two-passenger machine is to be built we will
      start by assuming the maximum combined weight of the two people to be 350
      pounds. Most of the professional aviators are lighter than this. Taking
      the medium between the weights of the Curtiss and Wright machines we have
      a net average of 850 pounds for the framework, motor, propeller, etc.
      This, with the two passengers, amounts to 1,190 pounds. As the machines
      quoted are in successful operation it will be reasonable to assume that
      this will be a safe basis to operate on.
What the Novice Must Avoid.
This does not mean, however, that it will be safe to follow these weights
      exactly in construction, but that they will serve merely as a basis to
      start from. Because an expert can turn out a machine, thoroughly equipped,
      of 850 pounds weight, it does not follow that a novice can do the same
      thing. The expert's work is the result of years of experience, and he has
      learned how to construct frames and motor plants of the utmost lightness
      and strength.
It will be safer for the novice to assume that he can not duplicate the
      work of such men as Wright and Curtiss without adding materially to the
      gross weight of the framework and equipment minus passengers.
How to Distribute the Weight.
Let us take 1,030 pounds as the net weight of the machine as against the
      same average in the Wright and Curtiss machines. Now comes the question of
      distributing this weight between the framework, motor, and other
      equipment. As a general proposition the framework should weigh about twice
      as much as the complete power plant (this is for amateur work).
The word "framework" indicates not only the wooden frames of the main
      planes, auxiliary planes, rudders, etc., but the cloth coverings as well—everything
      in fact except the engine and propeller.
On the basis named the framework would weigh 686 pounds, and the power
      plant 344. These figures are liberal, and the results desired may be
      obtained well within them as the novice will learn as he makes progress in
      the work.
Figuring on Surface Area.
It was Prof. Langley who first brought into prominence in connection with
      flying machine construction the mathematical principle that the larger the
      object the smaller may be the relative area of support. As explained in
      Chapter XIII, there are mechanical limits as to size which it is not
      practical to exceed, but the main principle remains in effect.
Take two aeroplanes of marked difference in area of surface. The larger
      will, as a rule, sustain a greater weight in relative proportion to its
      area than the smaller one, and do the work with less relative horsepower.
      As a general thing well-constructed machines will average a supporting
      capacity of one pound for every one-half square foot of surface area.
      Accepting this as a working rule we find that to sustain a weight of 1,200
      pounds—machine and two passengers—we should have 600 square
      feet of surface.
Distributing the Surface Area.
The largest surfaces now in use are those of the Wright, Voisin and
      Antoinette machines—538 square feet in each. The actual sustaining
      power of these machines, so far as known, has never been tested to the
      limit; it is probable that the maximum is considerably in excess of what
      they have been called upon to show. In actual practice the average is a
      little over one pound for each one-half square foot of surface area.
Allowing that 600 square feet of surface will be used, the next question
      is how to distribute it to the best advantage. This is another important
      matter in which individual preference must rule. We have seen how the
      professionals disagree on this point, some using auxiliary planes of large
      size, and others depending upon smaller auxiliaries with an increase in
      number so as to secure on a different plan virtually the same amount of
      surface.
In deciding upon this feature the best thing to do is to follow the plans
      of some successful aviator, increasing the area of the auxiliaries in
      proportion to the increase in the area of the main planes. Thus, if you
      use 600 square feet of surface where the man whose plans you are following
      uses 500, it is simply a matter of making your planes one-fifth larger all
      around.
The Cost of Production.
Cost of production will be of interest to the amateur who essays to
      construct a flying machine. Assuming that the size decided upon is double
      that of the glider the material for the framework, timber, cloth, wire,
      etc., will cost a little more than double. This is because it must be
      heavier in proportion to the increased size of the framework, and heavy
      material brings a larger price than the lighter goods. If we allow $20 as
      the cost of the glider material it will be safe to put down the cost of
      that required for a real flying machine framework at $60, provided the
      owner builds it himself.
As regards the cost of motor and similar equipment it can only be said
      that this depends upon the selection made. There are some reliable
      aviation motors which may be had as low as $500, and there are others
      which cost as much as $2,000.
Services of Expert Necessary.
No matter what kind of a motor may be selected the services of an expert
      will be necessary in its proper installation unless the amateur has
      considerable genius in this line himself. As a general thing $25 should be
      a liberal allowance for this work. No matter how carefully the engine may
      be placed and connected it will be largely a matter of luck if it is
      installed in exactly the proper manner at the first attempt. The chances
      are that several alterations, prompted by the results of trials, will have
      to be made. If this is the case the expert's bill may readily run up to
      $50. If the amateur is competent to do this part of the work the entire
      item of $50 may, of course, be cut out.
As a general proposition a fairly satisfactory flying machine, one that
      will actually fly and carry the operator with it, may be constructed for
      $750, but it will lack the better qualities which mark the higher priced
      machines. This computation is made on the basis of $60 for material, $50
      for services of expert, $600 for motor, etc., and an allowance of $40 for
      extras.
No man who has the flying machine germ in his system will be long
      satisfied with his first moderate price machine, no matter how well it may
      work. It's the old story of the automobile "bug" over again. The man who
      starts in with a modest $1,000 automobile invariably progresses by easy
      stages to the $4,000 or $5,000 class. The natural tendency is to want the
      biggest and best attainable within the financial reach of the owner.
It's exactly the same way with the flying machine convert. The more
      proficient he becomes in the manipulation of his car, the stronger becomes
      the desire to fly further and stay in the air longer than the rest of his
      brethren. This necessitates larger, more powerful, and more expensive
      machines as the work of the germ progresses.
Speed Affects Weight Capacity.
Don't overlook the fact that the greater speed you can attain the smaller
      will be the surface area you can get along with. If a machine with 500
      square feet of sustaining surface, traveling at a speed of 40 miles an
      hour, will carry a weight of 1,200 pounds, we can cut the sustaining
      surface in half and get along with 250 square feet, provided a speed of 60
      miles an hour can be obtained. At 100 miles an hour only 80 square feet of
      surface area would be required. In both instances the weight sustaining
      capacity will remain the same as with the 500 square feet of surface area—1,200
      pounds.
One of these days some mathematical genius will figure out this problem
      with exactitude and we will have a dependable table giving the maximum
      carrying capacity of various surface areas at various stated speeds, based
      on the dimensions of the advancing edges. At present it is largely a
      matter of guesswork so far as making accurate computation goes. Much
      depends upon the shape of the machine, and the amount of surface offering
      resistance to the wind, etc.